--- 
title: "Your Child's Horoscope - Volume II"
language: "en"
original_title: "Your Child's Horoscope - Volume II"
original_language: "en"
author: "Max Heindel"
original_source_file: "self"
---

<h1 id="your-childs-horoscope-volume-2">Your Child's Horoscope - Volume II</h1>

by Max Heindel [1865-1919]

THE ROSICRUCIAN FELLOWSHIP  
International Headquarters  
Mt. Ecclesia  
P.O. Box 713  
Oceanside, California, 92054, U.S.A.  

### <h3 id="contents">Contents</h3>

- [Foreword](#foreword) 
- [Virginia E. S.](#virginia) 
- [Clarence W. J.](#clarence-w-j) 
- [Wolcott B.](#wolcott) 
- [Marie Elizabeth H.](#marie-elizabeth-h) 
- [Donald R. D.](#donald-r-d) 
- [Alice Louise J.](#alice-louise-j) 
- [Harold A. B.](#harold-a-b) 
- [Elizabeth R. B.](#elizabeth-r-b) 
- [James M. J.](#james-m-j) 
- [Stephana Endora H.](#stephana-endora-h) 
- [John Allen Heine](#john-allen-heine) 
- [Janet Barbara H.](#janet-barbara-h) 
- [Victor L. S.](#victor-l-s) 
- [Doris A.](#doris-a) 
- [Linzee G.](#linzee-g) 
- [Marion S.](#marion-s) 
- [Carlos De U.](#carlos-de-u) 
- [Henry F.](#henry-f) 
- [Josephine M.](#josephine-m) 
- [Frances W.](#frances-w) 
- [Henry B. W.](#henry-b-w) 
- [Mildred Costa I.](#mildred-costa-i) 
- [Robert Leonard L.](#robert-leonard-l) 
- [Arminae B.](#arminae-b) 
- [Sarah June W.](#sarah-june-w) 
- [Harriet Josephine B.](#harriet-josephine-b) 
- [Albert P.](#albert-p) 
- [Albion W. L.](#albion-w-l) 
- [Nicholas A. D.](#nicholas-a-d) 
- [Carl R. M.](#carl-r-m) 
- [Homer H. M.](#homer-h-m) 
- [Virginia H.](#virginia-h) 
- [Richard L.](#richard-l) 
- [Edmond A. W.](#edmond-a-w)

<h2 id="your-childs-horoscope-h2">Your Child's Horoscope</h2>

### <h3 id="virginia-e-s">Virginia, E. S. - Born May 4, 1910, 12:30 a.m., Schenectady, New York.</h3>

At the time Virginia was born, the saturnine sign Capricorn was rising with Uranus, the erratic, spasmodic planet, sextile to Venus and square Saturn, the planet of obstruction. The cardinal signs always give a great deal of energy and this spends itself without trouble so long as it is allowed to go its rhythmic way, but when it is checked in its flow by Uranus' spasmodic vibrations it becomes like a horse held in leash. chafing and tugging at the bit, impatient and out of sorts. So it is with Virginia. There is a great deal of energy latent in her nature which is denied expression by the obstruction of Saturn, and this paves the way for the irritable vibrations of Uranus, so that she is often gloomy and out of patience with everything and everybody about her.

It is the privilege and the duty of her parents to help her form the habit of cheerfulness. Above all, she should not be scolded so long as there is any possibility of correcting her by reasoning, for harsh words will cause her to brood over real and fancied injuries and thus she will form a very bad habit.

The Moon is square to Mercury, the planet of mind, but trine to Mars, the planet of dynamic energy; thus we see that there is an inner struggle of the mind and an aspiration which seeks an avenue of expression. This is also shown by Jupiter being trine to Mercury; and that the basic nature is benevolent we may judge from the fact of this configuration, for Jupiter represents the higher idealistic side of being.

Venus is the planet of attraction and beauty. She is placed in her exaltation sign in the watery Pisces, a fact which accentuates the basic characteristics of her nature. She is also in the second house which deals with finance; thus we may judge that Virginia will always attract money. She will have no occasion to worry concerning the amount of money which she may spend within reason, but Venus is square to Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, showing that Virginia will want to throw the money out of the window as fast or faster than it can come in by the door; also, she will spend it on dress and finery. This is a tendency which the parents ought to discourage by all means in their power. Dress serves a useful purpose in developing the artistic nature, but is bad when it is overdone and becomes a mania. There are many other things in life which are of greater importance that call for attention.

The Moon is the principal significator of health for a woman, and we find in the case of Virginia that the Moon is trine to Mars, the planet of dynamic energy. Therefore, we may conclude that she will have a considerable store of vitality, which is something unusual for a Capricorn person, as they are generally lacking in life force on account of the saturnine obstruction. Saturn, the planet of obstruction, is also sextile to Mars, assuring Virginia quick recovery when sickness does overtake her.

### <h3 id="clarence-w-j">Clarence W. J. - Born Sept. 3, 1914, 5:30 p.m., Winifred, Montana.</h3>

Here we have a youngster of a fine, kindly disposition, for Jupiter, the planet of benevolence, is rising in the humanitarian sign Aquarius. It is trine to Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, which gives us our temper if we have one. But in Clarence's case, Mars' influence is softened because he is in the gentle Venus sign Libra. Therefore, he will not express temper, but his energy will be used in benevolent channels as indicated by the trine to Jupiter. This is an exceedingly fortunate configuration, for he who has the spirit of philanthropy which makes him love to do good thereby attracts the same from others, and will therefore live an exceedingly happy and prosperous life. There is only one flaw in this matter: Mars is impulsive, Uranus is still more so, and we find Uranus conjoined with Jupiter, trine to Mars. This configuration of Uranus with Mars and Jupiter will give Clarence the tendency to throw discrimination to the winds, and what he gives to, or does for, people will probably not do half the good it would do if expended with care.

But it costs money to be philanthropic in a large way, and the question, "Where is he going to get it?" is therefore pertinent. The same planets which show how he is inclined to spend also indicate the source of supply. Mars in Libra, and unafflicted, is very constructive; he tends to make that which is beautiful. His trine to Uranus, the planet which governs electricity, the ether, and all the new inventions which will make the Aquarian age a thousand times more wonderful than the dreams of Jules Verne, will put Clarence in touch with the World of Abstract Thoughts and Ideas. From the cosmic mind he will learn principles and laws of which we do not dream, also how to embody such things in epoch-making inventions. Moreover, he is not alone in that line, for during the seven years Uranus is going through the sign Aquarius, there is being born a new race of such marvels. When they grow up to be 15, 20, or 25 years of age, the world will hear from them. Things we never imagined in our wildest dreams will become part of our everyday life, and probably the present wonders of the world will be out of date altogether.

Mars, which gives Clarence the required energy to work out his plans, is ruler of the second house, which governs finances; his trine to Jupiter, the planet of opulence, guarantees abundance of funds; and as Jupiter rules Sagittarius, which is on the tenth house, indicating social honor, we may also judge that Clarence will be highly esteemed in the world.

We find another trine between Saturn, Venus, and the Moon; each is so placed that it is trine to the other two. The Moon is a significator of the mind; it is conjoined with the benefic Dragon's Head in the first house, and trine to Saturn. This adds depth to the instinctual mind and will probably act as a needed brake upon impulse, for the close conjunction of Mercury, the planet of reason, with the Sun, makes it certain that he will not be guided by logic, but will do as he *feels* is right.

The saturnine Dragon's Tail in conjunction with the Sun, in the sign Virgo, which rules the intestinal region, gives a tendency to digestive trouble; this testimony is further augmented by the square of Neptune and Venus. Neptune is on the cusp between Cancer, which rules the stomach, and Leo, which rules the heart. This shows that Clarence will be overfond of dainty things to eat, and that the system is likely to become clogged in consequence. The distended stomach pressing upon the heart will then add to the distress. Dyspepsia is the bane of many a life which would otherwise be happy, and the parents should practice frugality so that Clarence may learn in childhood, by their example, to form wise eating habits, and thus save himself much misery.

### <h3 id="wolcott-b">Wolcott B. - Born June 28, 1905, 12:45 p.m. New York City.</h3>

The editor has often held that the so-called "bad" aspects in a horoscope are our best teachers in Life's School, for they bring out the noblest virtues in us when we have had their whippings; also, that where there are no "bad" aspects, the person is so good that he is good for nothing. Looking at Wolcott's horoscope and seeing the many splendid aspects we became concerned at first that there was nothing "bad," till we found Uranus in opposition to the Sun and Neptune, also Saturn conjoined with the Dragon's Tail. That saves him, and we know he is going to be all right.

The first thing we note in Wolcott's horoscope is the two groups of three planets each in the eighth and ninth houses, highly elevated, and therefore in strong positions to affect him for good or ill according to the aspects. There is Mercury, the planet of reason, conjoined with Neptune, its higher octave, which gives a deep insight into spiritual things that is much higher than the intuition generated by Uranus, the octave of Venus. Mercury is also conjoined with the Sun, the source of all light and knowledge, yet not so closely as to be combust. Thus we have the full strength of these three planets focused through the ninth house, which rules the mind and religion. Furthermore, they are all trine to Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, and two of them are trine to Saturn, the planet of tact and diplomacy, giving Wolcott an active, well-balanced mind of a very unusual calibre. As this powerful configuration occurs in the ninth house, it is a question whether the mentality will seek its expression in the service of the state, as judge or legislator, or, in the church as a minister. Jupiter and Venus, the planets of rhythm and beauty, conjoined with the Moon in the sign Taurus, which governs the vocal organ, shows that he has a beautiful voice either for speaking or singing. So he has the oratorical power necessary to clothe his thoughts in speech in such a maner that he will attract attention in whatever field he chooses. But Neptune, the mystic planet, conjoined with Mercury, and the Sun in the psychic sign Cancer, will inevitably draw Wolcott to the church, but not to one of the orthodox variety, and in this field he will be a powerful leader.

Jupiter, the planet of opulence, is usually generous in all directions. His influence makes one feel that he has plenty, and need not be stingy. Venus is also inclined to be bountiful, and these characteristics may be expressed toward the person himself, as well as with respect to others. Here Jupiter, Venus, and the Moon are in Taurus, the sign which rules the palate. Wolcott will therefore be very fond of the so-called "good" things to eat. He likes his food highly seasoned, rich, and generously supplied. This inevitably leads to trouble. Saturn, the planet of obstruction, is conjoined with the saturnine Dragon's Tail in Pisces. This reacts on the opposite sign, Virgo, which rules the intestines, and interferes with the process of digestion, making him dyspeptic. At least, that is the tendency, if you do not take adequate steps to curb his appetite and teach him self-control in that respect. He may take up fads in food, and add to the trouble, as shown by Uranus opposition the Sun and Neptune in Cancer, the sign which rules the stomach. It is the parents' duty to set a good example for him by eating wisely.

Jupiter, Venus, and the Moon in the eighth house show that Wolcott is in line for some legacies. Mars essentially dignified on the cusp of the second house, which rules finance, and trine to the Sun, shows that he will have a splendid earning capacity, too. However, it also shows that he will be prone to spend it impulsively, as fast as it comes.

### <h3 id="marie-elizabeth-h">Marie Elizabeth H. - Born July 31, 1911, Newton, Mass.</h3>

Here we have a rather delicate little girl who will need special care from her parents, for Cancer, a sign of low vitality, is rising, and the Moon, which rules the Ascendant, is square to Neptune and Uranus. The Sun, which is the great reservoir of life, is also square Mars, the planet of dynamic energy. But do not be afraid that she may not live, because we enumerate all these malefie influences; we are just taking stock and looking the facts in the face, so that we may govern ourselves accordingly. One person may start out in life with a great big fortune, and by riotous living dissipate it all in a few years, while another, who has but little to begin with, may husband it skillfully and acquire a competence before the close of life. As it is with money, so also with our bodies and life force: riotous living will undermine the strongest health, and intelligent care will make a weak body strong. Thousands and thousands drag out existences of miserable invalidism or go down to early graves because their parents were ignorant of the need of strengthening their bodies in early childhood. Perhaps they thought that somehow their child would "grow out of it," when, had they but known, the horoscope showed a basically weak constitution which should have been strengthened by persistent systematic efforts during childhood – the earlier begun the better.

The root of Elizabeth's trouble is a weak heart and poor circulation of the blood, as shown by the square of the Sun to Mars, the energizer, and Jupiter, which governs the arterial circulation. Too vigorous exercise will make her heart palpitate and should therefore be avoided, but carefully graded gentle calisthenic movements, practised daily under the proper guidance, will work wonders. At the same time, careful attention should be paid to her diet, for Neptune is in Cancer, the sign which rules the stomach, and the Moon, which governs Cancer, is square to it from Libra, the sign ruling the kidneys. This shows that, as a result of the impaired vitality, digestion will be weak and the elimination of fluids by way of the kidneys will not be good. She needs good nourishment, which at the same time is easily digestible. If you can possibly get it, we suggest milk fresh from the cow, or better still, goats' milk. There is nothing to equal it for building her up. Coarse, whole-wheat bread is also needed, both for its nourishing qualities, and its stimulating effect on the peristaltic action. Mars in opposition to Jupiter, which is in Scorpio, the sign ruling the rectum, conjunction with the saturnine Dragon's Tail, shows the need of this.

We also find that the Sun is in conjunction with the Ascelli, a nebulous spot in Leo six degrees, and square to Mars. The Moon, the other luminary, is square Neptune. This indicates that care should be taken of Elizabeth's eyes during childhood. Guard them against strong sunlight, and go with her to school to see that she is so placed that the light does not hurt her eyes. This configuration also indicates that her spiritual sight may be easily developed, but the adverse aspects show that it would not be desirable. She should never be allowed to attend spiritualistic or kindred meetings.

To sum up, you have a child that needs all the care you can give her in all directions, but forewarned is forearmed. There is no cause for alarm if reasonable precautions are taken before trouble develops.

### <h3 id="donald-r-d">Donald R. D. - Born May 26, 1912, 7:50 p.m., Tonopah, Nevada.</h3>

At Donald's birth the zodiacal sign Cancer was rising. This is a sign of scant vitality, but as Mars, the great energizer, is in the first house and sextile to the Sun, the life-giver, Donald will have plenty of vitality, notwithstanding. This configuration will strengthen the heart, for Mars is on the cusp of Leo, the sign which rules that vital organ. Were it not for this sextile, the opposition of Mars, from the sign of the heart, to Uranus, the planet of irregularity, would have caused palpitation, which is happily averted. It would be well, nevertheless, to guard him against violent exertion during the years of growth.

While on the subject of health, we may also note the conjunction of Saturn and Venus in Taurus. Taurus rules the throat, and Saturn, the stellar agency of obstruction, is also naturally cold. Therefore, this configuration warns us that Donald will be subject to swollen tonsils, which will obstruct the throat, and that is the point where he is liable to catch cold. When he is sixteen or seventeen years of age this condition will be the worst, because then the Moon will be passing through Taurus and vivify the affliction. But be not alarmed, the planets have shown you the weak spots, and you have ample time and the best of opportunities to strengthen that part of the constitution.

It is best to inure the throat to cold from childhood, and above all, do not allow the tonsils to be removed. They serve a purpose in the body and by patient rational treatment, such as massage, the circulation can be kept free in the earliest years until the weakness has been overcome. Usually an affliction in one sign carries with it a weakness in the region governed by the opposite sign. Thus, an affliction in Taurus, which rules the throat, would also affect the part of the body which is under Scorpio, namely, the eliminative organs, causing obstruction of the urine or constipation. In this horoscope, however, we find the disturbing factor, Saturn, beneficently configured with Mars, the ruler of Scorpio, and we may therefore judge that Donald will not be troubled by this reflex action. That is a great point in the preservation of health, for where there is regular and thorough elimination of waste from the body, disease does not easily take root.

Donald will never be a good reasoner, for Mercury, the planet of logic, is in an intercepted sign, and unaspected, but the Moon, which rules the instinctual mind, is in good aspect to Jupiter, the planet of benevolence. The cosmic light-giver, the Sun, is also in favorable configuration with Uranus, the planet of intuition. Thus Donald will be guided by impressions and feelings: his nature will be psychic and sensitive, as shown also by Neptune being placed in the first house in the psychic sign Cancer. He will therefore be unfit for ordinary worldly life, and will tend to shut himself off from others at an early point in his life. He will be a lonely boy, misunderstood in his surroundings, and he needs the sympathetic care of his parents in a greater degree than most children on that account.

This lonely, introspective childhood will prepare him fo his work in the world, an important humanitarian work, as shown by the second, sixth, and tenth houses. On the second house governing finance, we find Leo, the sign of the heart, and, did you ever know anyone with a big heart that had also a full pocketbook? That kind is, we believe, scarcer than the proverbial "hen's teeth." The ruler of the second house, the Sun, is in opposition to Jupiter, the planet of opulence, and Mars, the planet of prodigality, is on the second cusp, showing that Donald will always be poor in the world's wealth because he will be extremely open-handed. We learn also, though, that he will be rich in heavenly treasure, which he will not have to leave behind when death marks the time of reaping what he has sown, for Jupiter, the planet of benevolence and idealism, is essentially dignified in Sagittarius, in the sixth house. Jupiter is in good aspect with the Moon, the planet of fecundation, and Sagittarius is the sign of religion, philanthropy, etc. This shows that a life rich in opportunity for noble service awaits Donald.

He may never become widely known, for Jupiter, the ruler of the tenth house, which governs social standing, has only two aspects, but I would rather have his horoscope than that of a multi-millionaire philanthropist who spends money on "institutes" and kindred grand schemes which advertise the donor widely The kindly, personal touch of a true Samaritan who feels with, and for, his suffering brother is worth more in actual soul-growth than all such impersonal charities, and Donald has one of the "luckiest" horoscopes I have ever come across. May he live up to it and grasp the opportunities it presents.

### <h3 id="alice-louise-j">Alice Louise J. — Born May 3, 1910, 6:30 a.m., Providence, R. I.</h3>

Here we have a little lady with a mind as bright as a new dollar, for the intellectual, scientific sign Gemini is rising with Mercury, its ruler, near the ASC, and trine to Jupiter, another significator of mind, in the sign Libra. This position of Mercury, the planet of speech and reason, will also give Alice the ability to express herself. She will indeed have an unusually glib tongue, for Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, is parallel to Mercury; that brightens and quickens both wit and speech to a wonderful degree.

People who have that configuration *alone* are often veritable chatterboxes, whose tongues are continually wagging unmeaning words at somebody. This is not the case with Alice, though, for Saturn, the planet of obstruction, is in Aries, which rules the head and brain, and sextile to the Moon, another significator of mind. This adds depth to the mind and makes her tactful, self-reliant, and persistent, so that whatever end she seeks to gain, she will always persevere until her object is attained, particularly since the Moon is situated in the MC, which governs the social position. This shows also that Alice will be fitted for a trusted position of a public nature, and the ruler of the rising sign trine to Jupiter, the planet of expansion, shows that there will be a general success in the whole life. The planets being scattered over the whole horoscope shows that she is of a versatile nature who can fit in any place, and such people are always sought. In all probability she will choose a literary career, and it would be well to shape her studies accordingly.

Regarding the nature of the faults latent within her, we learn from the square of Mars to Jupiter and Venus that she will be inordinately fond of dress and pleasures, exceedingly extravagant, and so generous that she may give away her last dollar, even though in want herself. Also, she is apt to be insanely jealous concerning anyone she loves. Mars square Venus also gives a liability to suffer from slander, and Mars square Jupiter shows a tendency to loss through indiscreet speculation. When you know these latent faults, naturally you will also realize how best to apply the remedy. With respect to this inordinate fondness for dress, it may probably be curbed considerably, or else led into a constructive channel, by teaching her how to make her own clothes and design them in an artistic manner. The parallel of Mars and Mercury makes her extremely dexterous, quick, and bright. She will without a doubt enjoy the opportunity to exercise her creative ability in an artistic direction and from the years of childhood her dolls should be given to her with material from which she must make the clothing for them herself. Then she will naturally in later years use the faculty to adorn her own person.

With regard to the impulsive generosity shown by Mars square Jupiter, the planet of benevolence, it would probably also be best to teach her by object lessons. If you let her give her things away and then feel the loss, it is likely to cure her, for a child of her nature will feel very intensely upon any subject. The tendency to excessive jealousy can also be dealt with in the home, especially if there are a number of brothers and sisters. Do whatever you can to eradicate this trait, for it is one of the most painful feelings and the victims thereof are very much to be pitied.

With respect to her speculative tendency we would advise that you allow no card games in the home and speak disparagingly of gambling and speculation outside the regular channels of business. So much can be done toward moulding the character in the earlier years, and any fault which is not too firmly ingrained can be eradicated by the precepts and example of the parents, especially the latter.

Venus, the planet of love and art, is in favorable aspect to Uranus, the planet of intuition and inspiration. This will make Alice very intuitive, so that as a rule she will not need to reason things out, but will have the solution as soon as the problem is presented. From the aspects between these two planets (Venus and Uranus), Alice will also receive a marked musical ability. The positions and aspects of Mercury, already spoken of, give her great dexterity and so, without a doubt she will become a high class performer, as well as an inspirational interpreter of music. We have no doubt that you will give her every opportunity to cultivate this latent talent.

Uranus is the ruler of the eleventh house sign, which governs friends, and Venus, the planet of love and attraction, is in the eleventh house in Pisces, its exaltation sign. This position and the aspect of Uranus shows that Alice will have many friends who will be of great benefit to her, and her success in life will come through their efforts as well as by her own capabilities. But, as we said before, she is also liable to be slandered publicly. Saturn, the planet of obstruction, is in the twelfth house, the house of sorrow, trouble, and self-undoing, and a person who has these configurations should be far more circumspect in his or her conduct than other people. Actions which may seem perfectly innocent and natural in one may be taken up and made much of in the other. You may, therefore, save her a great deal of sorrow if you can get her to understand this point and avoid all app erance of evil just as much as she would the evil itself.

With respect to health, we find that Saturn, the planet of obstruction, is in Aries square to Uranus, the planet of spasmodic action, in Capricorn. It is a rule that planets which are in signs that govern parts below the trunk have a reflex action in their opposite signs, and we may therefore judge that Uranus will be active in Cancer, which rules the stomach. On that account Alice will be subject to severe attacks of headache at uncertain intervals, and you will also find that a great deal of the trouble comes from the stomach. Therefore, she should be taught the virtue of frugality from the earliest childhood, for the stomach is also afflicted by the presence of Mars and Neptune in Cancer. There is no more miserable person on earth than a dyspeptic forced to eat and unable to digest; life is truly a burden for such people, and anything you can do to aid Alice in averting that fate will surely be a worthwhile blessing to her.

### <h3 id="harold-a-b">Harold A. B. - Born Nov. 6, 1913, 3:10 a.m., Columbus, Ohio.</h3>

This is a young man who is going to let people know when he is about. No quiet little mouse is one who has cardinal signs on the angles! Harold wants the center of the stage, and with Mars, the planet of dynamic energy right up in the midheaven, you may be sure he will secure attention and push to the front. From this it is not to be inferred that he is a bombastic braggart—not at all. Venus on the ASC, essentially dignified in the polite, pleasing sign Libra, and well aspected to Moon and Saturn, will give him an attractive personality that will naturally bring attention. Saturn in the mercurial sign Gemini will give him tact and balance, and the Moon in the intellectual sign Aquarius makes him quickwitted.

Thus Harold is bound to become a very fine young man who will merit the leadership to which he lays claim. Mercury, the planet of the concrete mind, is in good aspect to Uranus, the planet of intuition; this will make him very intuitive and quick to grasp whatever he wishes to investigate. The Sun in the energetic sign Scorpio, which occupies the second house, rules finances, and it is also in this house, well aspected to Jupiter, the planet of opulence. This indicates that Harold will have an abundance of this world's goods.

But wealth is a responsibility. Blessed is the man who sees in it a trust, and holds it as a steward would hold his master's property. If we abuse it, it may become a curse and ruin us, soul and body. This is the danger Harold is facing, for Mars, the ruler of the second house, is highly elevated and square to Venus on the ASC. This tends to make him very domineering, especially with the opposite sex, yet prone to lavish presents on them, for his own ends. This position also indicates a liability to contract disease on account of amorous indulgences. On that account it will be necessary for the parents to lay aside all false modesty and educate Harold thoroughly in this matter. He should be taught to reverence the generative function, to feel the sanctity of motherhood and fatherhood, to look with the deepest respect upon all women, and to know the frightful consequences of abuse of the divine function of procreation. Thank God, the horoscope shows only tendencies which may be fostered or suppressed by will, and there is every reason to hope that you will be successful in training him rightly if you apply yourselves to the task, for the configuration occurs in cardinal signs. Had the signs been fixed it would have been much more difficult to overcome the tendency.

Saturn, the planet of cold and obstruction, is in Gemini, the sign which rules the lungs. This shows a tendency to cold which will settle in the lungs; but as Saturn is well asspected to Venus and the Moon in the other airy signs, Libra and Aquarius, there is no danger of any serious trouble. At the same time it is well to be careful, especially in the earlier years. Mars in Cancer, the sign which rules the stomach, square Venus and Jupiter, shows that Harold will enjoy the pleasures of the table more than is good for him; teach him to eat with discrimination. He has a keen wit, and will see the wisdom in time if you practice the precepts you preach to him. However, it will not help him if you teach him to be frugal and live to please your own palates. Then he will probably be all the more determined to have his fling when your authority over him has passed with the waning years.

### <h3 id="elizabeth-b-b">Elizabeth B. B. -  Born Nov. 19, 1910, 8:30 a.m., Long. 91 W., Lat. 41 N.</h3>

At the time of Elizabeth's birth Sagittarius was rising, but even though its ruler, Jupiter, is the most elevated planet, we must consider the Sun life ruler, for Jupiter is in aspect with only two of the planets, while the Sun is unafflicted and in aspect with four. The saturnine sign Capricorn is in the first house, and if there were no other configuration to offset this influence, it would make Elizabeth gloomy and morose, but the powerful position of the Sun dispels the gloom and changes the nature. The Sun is conjoined with Mercury, the planet of reason, and Venus, the planet of love and beauty; it is sextile to Uranus, the planet of intuition, and trine to Neptune, the planet of spiritual perception.

Thus it is plain that Elizabeth will have a kindly nature, good reasoning faculty, reliable intuition, and deep spiritual perception. These faculties will come to the surface with the passing years.

The Moon also lends her aid in forming the mind and disposition. We find her in the psychic sign Cancer, trine Jupiter and Mars. This makes the mind still more benevolent and gives activity. Elizabeth will not content herself with dreams, though she will have them in abundance, but she will strive to make her dreams come true, with regard to both spiritual and material things. She will not have a great deal of this world's goods to do with, for Saturn, the planet of obstruction, is in opposition to Jupiter, the planet of opulence. However, that is no drawback, for one who gives herself bestows a greater gift than gold. The Sun, Venus, and Mercury in the eleventh house, denoting friends, hopes, wishes, and aspirations, show that Elizabeth will have the love and help of a host of friends who will aid her to realize all she ever can dream of. Thus her life will be lived to an unusual fullness.

It is said that a prophet is not without honor save in his own country, and unusual characters are often misunderstood in their homes, where they are looked upon as "odd." Saturn, the planet of obstruction, is principal ruler of the first house which describes conditions during childhood. He is in the fourth house, which signifies one of the parents, and in opposition to Jupiter in the tenth house, which describes the other. This shows that there is a difference of opinion between the parents, or that it will develop, so that one will want to restrain Elizabeth's tendencies and mold them in the conventional channels as shown by Saturn, while the other will favor expansion as signified by Jupiter. Caution and conservatism are good, but too many “don’ts” are apt to spoil life for children and make them long to break away. The parents thus lose their chance to guide an Ego that came to them for help. Parents should realize that it is wrong to demand that, because they love a child, that child must efface itself entirely and do just as the parents wish. The child has come into the world to get a certain experience, and must work out its own destiny. It is a crime to deprive it of this right, and it is reprehensible to a superlative degree to use filial love as a whip to enforce obedience.

The opposition of Uranus, the planet of spasmodic action, to Neptune, the planet which, physically considered, brings confusion, in the sign Cancer, which rules the stomach, shows that Elizabeth will develop a strange taste in food. However, there is nothing to show that her method will have a detrimental effect on the system, and it must therefore be rational, whatever it is. Saturn, the planet of obstruction is in Taurus, the sign which governs the throat. He is opposed by Jupiter, the planet of expansion. This shows a tendency to enlarged tonsils. Be careful not to remove them, for at the time of puberty they will become normal again. The Sun, Mars, and Jupiter in Scorpio, the sign which rules the private parts, shows that the menses will be extremely copious, but do not be alarmed; there is no indication of danger, and in time the condition will subside. Be careful to strengthen the throat in childhood; that may prevent the swollen tonsils.

### <h3 id="james-m-j">James M. J. - born Nov. 19, 1911, Los Angeles, Calif.</h3>

Here we have a youngster with Saturn rising in Taurus, opposition to the Moon. An afflicted Saturn is cruel, relentless, and obstructive. Taurus is fixed and stubborn, determined to have its own way; Scorpio is also unfeeling and without sympathy, and the Moon takes on the nature of the sign it is in. So if there were no other influences to be considered, we would have to judge that James is extremely selfish, cruel, and unsympathetic. But Venus, the planet of love, is in good aspect to Mercury, the planet of mind. This at once takes the edge off the indication of cruelty, and the spiritual influence of the Sun conjunction Jupiter, the planet of benevolence, cannot be underestimated as a factor in mellowing the nature. Thus, by synthesizing the auguries, we come to the conclusion that James is going to be very strong-willed, and determined to have his own way, but although he may at times, under adverse planetary conditions, seem cruel and unsympathetic, there is nevertheless a noble and kindly side to his nature. This side should be fostered by the parents to the utmost of their ability.

Scorpio, the great healing sign, being so strongly fortified by the presence of the Sun, Moon, and Jupiter, shows that James will make an excellent surgeon, and that is a vocation where there is more scope for kindness and cruelty than in any other profession. By vivisection and experimental operation a surgeon may cause unspeakable misery to his fellowmen and animals. He may also earn the everlasting gratitude of sufferers by constructive surgery. If the parents can suppress the cruel side of James' nature and foster the kindly side, they may make him a great benefactor to the world and make it possible for him to attain a most wonderful soul-growth. They have a great opportunity, and a great responsibility. May God help them to bring out the best in their child.

Should it appear, however, that he does not soften as readily as hoped for, beware of letting him go into the medical profession, for when he sees blood it will harden his nature further. God has provided another way for him which will automatically soften the nature. We find Venus, the planet of art and music, in her own sign, Libra, which expresses the beautiful and noble. She is well aspected by Mercury, the planet of mind, and Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, showing that James has musical ability. The Sun and Jupiter are also in good aspect to Neptune and Uranus from the seventh house, which indicates the public. Neptune gives an unusual touch to the musical temperament, which makes those who have it different from the general run of musicians. This is perhaps the safest road for James, or it may be that with music as a safeguard he will be all right as a healer. That will be for the parents to judge, but they should not by any means neglect cultivation of the musical talent even if it is decided to let him pursue the medical profession.

Saturn in Taurus will make James frugal in his food; the Moon in Scorpio will make elimination of waste almost too free, and as the Sun, the giver of life, is conjoined with the expansive Jupiter, we may judge that James will have a very long life and good health. Saturn in Taurus gives him a tendency to cold in the throat, and Mars in Gemini shows that it may settle in the apex of the lungs. Look out for him in those respects, and should the tonsils swell, use massage; once he is past the fifteenth year, that trouble will disappear.

With respect to the financial prospects we find that James will be well taken care of, for the Sun is conjoined with Jupiter, the planet of opulence, and anyone with Saturn on the ASC is bound to be thrifty. If he spends his money, he is going to get full value. Mercury, the ruler of the second house in good aspect to Venus, the planet of art, shows that he may become a collector of art and use considerable money to gratify that desire. This will be good as it brings out the best side of his nature.

### <h3 id="stephana-endora-h">Stephana Endora H. — Born January 14, 1913, 6:25 a.m., Denver, Colorado.</h3>

Capricorn was rising at the time of Endora's birth, and that is not usually very propitious as it favors gloom and timidity. In this case, however, we find that Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, which is exalted in Capricorn, is right on the ASC, in conjunction with Mercury, the planet of reason, and Jupiter, the jovial planet always ready with a hearty hand-shake and a beaming smile. This makes Endora different, particularly as all these planets are sextile to Venus, the planet of love. The Sun is also in the first house to brighten the temperament and disposition. This will give Endora a very happy childhood, but she will have to hew her own road to success in life. Of course, she will be the better for it, as it will give her more strength and self-reliance wherewith to overcome the underlying Capricornian timidity.

The Sun signifies the Spirit, the individual Self, and it is trine to Saturn, the planet of persistence, showing that no matter what obstacles may be placed in her way, she will in a quiet, persistent manner achieve her own ends in the course of time. Mercury, the planet which governs the reasoning mind, being in conjunction with Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, and Jupiter, the planet of benevolence, shows that she has a keen, noble mind, extremely alert, both to the practical, artistic, and idealistic sides of life. The practical side comes from Mars, the love of beauty from Venus, and the elevated ideals and general success in life are shown by the conjunction of Mercury with Jupiter.

Venus, the planet of love and attraction, is in the second house in Pisces, her exaltation sign, where she is particularly strong, and her sextile to the three above named planets, particularly her configuration with Jupiter, the planet of opulence, shows that Endora will have an affluence with which she will be very generous. The trine of the Sun to Saturn, the planet of tact and diplomacy, in the fifth house, the house of speculation, shows also that she will be thrifty and will be capable of making shrewd investments to make what she has earn a still further increment.

We know that every rose has its thorn, however, and that nothing in life is perfect as yet. Therefore it is not surprising to find that there is also another side to Endora's mind and disposition, and the lessons she has to learn are shown by the Moon in Aries, square to Mercury, the planet of mind, from the third house. This house signifies the mentality and also travel. The Moon shows the instinctual mind and it is strengthened by being in Aries, the part of the zodiac which governs the head and brain. From this configuration we learn, in the first place, that it will be best for Endora not to travel, as change will always bring her loss and trouble. That is not the worst, though. It gives her a superficiality, so that at times she will want to flit from subject to subject, taking up this, that, and the other study or work, and finishing nothing when transits or progressed positions of the planets bring this configuration into activity. If this habit is allowed to grow, it will interfere seriously with her work, and her memory will also be affected. It should, therefore, be the aim of the parents to look out for and discourage this tendency, while fostering the other good sides of the mentality of the child.

Besides the splendid mental qualities which are shown in this horoscope, you will also find that Endora will develop a surprising dexterity. She will be able to turn her hand to anything, and the way she will make work fly with little or no seeming effort will be amazing to all who see it.

Among other things, too, you will find that the exaltation position of Venus in Pisces with the configuration to Mercury, Mars, and Jupiter, will make her quite an able musician with an uncommon spirit in the rendition of the themes she chooses.

There is one field of life, however, where her path will be the very reverse of smooth: courtship. Saturn, the planet of obstruction, in the fifth house, which governs the attraction of the sexes, always makes matters very difficult, if it does not entirely forbid them. In this case though, we find that Saturn is trine to the Sun, which is the significator of marriage for a woman. Therefore, we may judge that Endora will by patience and persistence finally find the craved companionship — and she will crave it. There is in her a very strong love nature, shown by the sextile of Venus to Mars, Mercury, and Jupiter. Therefore the denial of this relationship would be to her a loss of all that is worth while in life. However, no matter how good the aspect of Saturn is to any planet except Mercury or possibly the Moon, where it steadies and deepens the mind, there is always some little hitch in the benefit received. It is the nature of Saturn to restrain, and in a case like this where he is configurated with the Sun in a woman's horoscope, we may judge that however kind and good the husband may be, he tends to act as a damper upon her in a certain sense, especially as the Sun is in the saturnine sign Capricorn. You will find that the women born between December 21st and January 21st, when the Sun is in Capricorn, usually marry men who hold a heavy restraining hand over them, especially if the Sun is adversely configurated with Saturn by conjunction, square, or opposition. Even the trine, as here in Endora's horoscope, will make itself felt to some extent. Usually it is most difficult to escape from the things signified by Saturn, but there may be an escape for Endora from this condition if you instill into her from babyhood the idea that we are all Spirits and equal in the scheme of evolution, so that no matter if for the present life one is manifesting in a male or a female body, everyone has the same fundamental rights and prerogatives; no one is entitled by marriage or any other relationship to dominate anyone else. Teach her that it is the duty of everyone to guard his or her own individual rights and refuse to submit to undue influence or authority, because now it is our task to evolve individuality, and habits of self-abusement are subversive of attainment of that end.

Endora's general health will be good except at such times when the erratic streak spoken of comes to the surface and makes her restless. Then the Moon square to Mercury, which has rule over the nervous system, is apt to cause a temporary general state of nervousness. The position of the Sun and Neptune affecting the region of Cancer, which governs the stomach, shows also that at such times an attack of nervous indigestion may manifest itself. In this case, however, there is little wrong with the body. What you will have to work with is the mental condition, for that will be the cause of any passing disturbance to the health.

### <h3 id="john-allen-heine">John Allen Heine - Born August 4, 1913, 2:30 a.m. New York City.</h3>

The first thought that strikes us on seeing this horoscope is a doubt if John will live, for Cancer, a sign of slight vitality, is rising, with its ruler, the Moon, squared by Saturn, the destroyer. Doubt is soon dispelled though, by the observation that Saturn receives the sextile of the life-giving Sun, and the Moon is well aspected with Jupiter, the planet of vital magnetism. These aspects give John sufficient life force to carry him through. At the same time, it is evident that he requires more than ordinary care, and as the affliction of Saturn comes from Gemini, which rules the lungs, he should be specially guarded against cold for it is apt to settle in the chest. If it is possible to migrate to a less rigorous climate, it would undoubtedly be well to do so. Breathing exercises and gymnastics rationally practiced during childhood will strengthen the chest and give him resistance in later life. If right methods are followed John will be as strong as any ordinary boy.

When we investigate John from the standpoint of mentality, we meet with a very different person; there he is almost a giant. Mars, the energizer, in the mercurial sign Gemini, trine to Uranus, the planet of intuition, in the intellectual sign Aquarius, shows that John has an energetic, quick mind which grasps things instantly the moment they are presented. Saturn, the planet of obstruction, in Mercury's sign Gemini and sextile to that planet, gives depth to the mind and the ability to reason correctly. The Moon, signifying the instinctual mind, is also in a mercurial sign, Virgo, trine to Jupiter, the philosophic planet, adding its testimony to the excellency of John's mental capacity. John will have some very advanced ideas on social and economic problems, which will bring him into a public work of a benevolent nature. He will be successful in that work. This is shown by Jupiter, ruler of the sixth and tenth houses (which signify the nature of the service one renders in the world and the social standing), trine the Moon, ruler of the second house, which shows the financial reward of service. Saturn, the planet of deceit, in the twelfth house, the house of sorrow and secret enemies, square the Moon, shows that he will not escape the usual fate of all who endeavor to work for the uplift of their fellowmen. He will be slandered and traduced, but as Christ said: "Blessed are ye when men shall accuse you falsely for my sake.”

There is only one thing about this horoscope which we regret: Venus, the planet of love in its ordinary human application, is unaspected in the twelfth house. John will meet sincere regard from all who come in contact with him in his work, but few, if any, will reach into his life and love John for himself; he will be a recluse and a lonely soul. At least, such is the tendency, and the mother should endeavor to supply the want of love if possible. Every human being craves in its innermost heart that deepest of all sympathy, and no matter how well we may have fixed our hearts in God, we feel poor without that human touch. Christ Jesus felt sadder in Gethsemane because His disciples could sleep while He was in such anguish, and everyone who has been through the smaller gardens of aloneness knows what that means. If he will let you be his companion on those occasions, you will both be blessed.

### <h3 id="janet-barbara-h">Janet Barbara H. — Born January 1, 1904, 11:50 a.m., Leicester, England.</h3>

At Janet's birth we find the martial sign Aries rising and the three other cardinal signs are on the other angles, showing that she has an abundance of energy and that the life will be a very active one. The planets in her horoscope are scattered all over the figure, so that she will be versatile and able to take care of herself under any and all circumstances. If she does not succeed in one thing she will take up something else and never become discouraged.

The Sun is at the zenith point, to endow her with vitality and give her good cheer throughout life. The Moon, which is the particular significator of health for a woman, is trine to Mars, the reservoir of dynamic energy, and Saturn, the great obstructer, is unaspected, so that there is every prospect of a long life in good health before Janet. However, Saturn always does some damage to the part of the body where he is located, or its opposite point, and as he is in Aquarius, we may therefore judge that in the latter part of life he will obstruct the circulation in the ankles and slightly check the heart. Seeing that he is unaspected, however, the effect will probably be very slight, so that it may scarcely even be felt. With respect to the mental capacities, we note that Venus is sextile to Mercury and Moon; Mercury and Venus are parallel so that she will be of a kindly and sympathetic disposition. Because of Moon trine Mars, she will always seek the friendship and companionship of man in preference to woman, and she will benefit by them, for Mars is in the eleventh house signifying friends. This configuration also gives her a good income, but she will be rather prodigal with it and therefore liable to financial ups and downs.

The Sun near the Midheaven in the cardinal sign Capricorn shows that Janet will rise in life by the help of people in a higher social position, and she will probably obtain employment in connection with the government.

We find Jupiter, the planet of benevolence, in Pisces, the twelfth house sign, intercepted in the twelfth house and square the Moon. This gives us the key to Janet's principal fault and the trouble it will give her in life unless it is overcome. Being so extremely efficient herself, she will find it hard to allow for the deficiencies of others, and this lack of tolerance will make enemies for her. Though they will not be able to hurt her permanently, we cannot escape the fact that we always suffer ourselves in some way when we hurt others. If you will impress upon her the necessity of being tactful and tolerant of other people's feelings there is no question that it will help her considerably in life.

According to the horoscope, there is no tendency to indiscretion in her association with young men whom, as said, she will seek in preference to young women, and we do not think that ever the breath of slander will come near her. Nevertheless, Mercury and Venus are in Scorpio, the sign which rules the generative organs, showing that sex will play some part in the attraction, and it would, therefore, be well to show her the womanly woman as an ideal so that by a correct manner and conduct she will be her own protection.

Uranus, the planet of intuition, and the Moon, the symbol of the dreamer, are in Gemini and Sagittarius, the signs signifying mind. This shows that Janet will be intuitive and may probably seek to delve into the occult, but as the Sun is in opposition to Neptune, the latter in the psychic sign Cancer, she ought especially to beware of ever becoming entangled with spirit controls. However, upon second thought, we believe that Janet will be quite safe in this respect, on account of her otherwise positive nature. But forewarned is forearmed, and should ever the occasion arise, it will be best for her not to have anything to do with spiritualistic phenomena, for that is playing with fire.

### <h3 id="victor-l-s">Victor, L. S. — Born Sept. 17, 1913, 12:14 p.m., Los Angeles, California.</h3>

At the time of Victor's birth the aspirational sign, Sagittarius, was rising, with Jupiter, its ruler and the planet of opulence, in the first house. This is a very fortunate position so far as health and vitality are concerned, for the opulence which expresses itself in financial fortune to the favorites of Jupiter is also operative in giving health and strength when it comes from the angle which determines these factors in life. As wealth can never compensate for health, one on whom Jupiter bestows the latter is surely much more to be congratulated than when it merely takes the form of material means, which is often a source of evil in other directions. Therefore, we may say that Victor drew a good prize in this life when he was born with a fundamentally healthy constitution. Saturn, the obstructer, is in Gemini, the sign which rules the lungs, but he is sextile to both Venus and the Moon. This should offset his square to the Sun and give Victor a life of general good health, and when sickness does come at rare intervals he should be able to throw off the effects and recuperate easily.

With respect to the disposition, a number of conflicting influences are noted. Venus, the planet of love, is trine to the Moon, which is the significator of the instinctual mind, showing an underlying kindly disposition. But we find Saturn, the planet of obstruction, square to the Sun, which is the giver of life, light, and joy. This shows gloom and the gloom is deepened by the fact that the Sun is in conjunction with the saturnine Dragon's Tail, and with Mercury (combust), the significator of the concrete mind. We also find that this configuration takes place in the ninth house, ruling the higher mind. Thus we have before us an Ego that tends to wrap itself in a garment of gloom and draw apart from its fellows, an exceedingly unfortunate tendency, for by the process of brooding over their troubles, whether they are real or fancied, these people build around them a shell which is really and truly like a cage in which the Spirit is imprisoned. Furthermore, such people are exceedingly difficult to help, for they resent any effort to get them out of their shell as an insult or an injury, and regard those who want to befriend them as their worst enemies.

Fortunately, though you have come to us at a very early age of your child, The invisible vehicles are still in the making, so we hope and pray that you may be able to save this Ego from such a terrible fate. In the first place, no matter what he does, be sure that you do not scold him, for he will be exceedingly sensitive to harsh treatment and take the slightest words very much to heart. Do everything you can to make his childhood cheerful, and particularly see that: he spends as much time as possible out of doors with the birds and the flowers. The trine of the Moon to Venus, the planet of art and beauty, will give him a keen sense of enjoyment in that direction, and we hope it will keep the door to his heart open so that the sunshine of life will dispel the gloom of Saturn.

Another configuration which we find bearing upon Victor's mental condition is Neptune sextile to the Sun and Mercury. Mercury, the planet of reason, is, as said, afflicted by its conjunction to the saturnine Dragon's Tail and is also combust, too closely under the Sun's rays, a position that burns up the qualities of the planet so placed. Therefore, we may judge that Victor will not be a good reasoner but will have something better to guide him. Neptune is the higher octave of Mercury, and the sextile mentioned will give him the solution to his problems without the necessity of reasoning them out beforehand, but after he has arrived at a conclusion he will be able to give a reason why that is the best way out in a given situation. That is the difference between the actions of Uranus and Neptune. Both planets enable us under certain configurations to solve our problems without the process of reasoning. When we arrive at a result through the medium of Uranus, we know only that so-and-so is the best solution, or that so-and-so is a fact; we cannot tell why. If the Neptunian ray is used to solve our difficulties, we know both the answers to our problems and the reason, without having recourse to the faculty of logic.

In his dealings with others, the sextile of Saturn, the planet of tact and diplomacy, to the Moon, will give Victor these qualities so that he will not act on impulse, but always deliberately and with forethought.

When we look for his faults in order to help him by suppressing them before they have a chance to make themselves manifest, we find that Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, is square Mercury, the planet of reason. This shows that there will be an abundance of mental activity. He will conceive thousands of schemes and will make resolutions, but will lack the patience and persistence to carry them out. If this tendency is allowed to manifest and mature, it is going to be the worst drawback to his success in life; you must therefore endeavor to help him to develop constancy of purpose. Saturn, the planet of persistence, sextile to the Moon, helps to minimize the tendency, but it will nevertheless require considerable work on your part to impress upon him from the earliest childhood that whatever he starts he must carry out to the end. Do not let him start to build a house with blocks and tear it down before it is half finished to make a gate, leave that partly done and go on to doing something else, but coax him, help him, prod him, do whatever you can to get him to finish the the house first—and use a similar method in all other respects. Teach him to do one thing at a time and devote his whole energy to that, to the exclusion of everything else, until that thing has been completed.

### <h3 id="doris-a">Doris A. — Born March 26, 1915, 4 a.m., Texas.</h3>

At Doris’ birth, four common signs were on the angles, and the Moon, which is the planet of dreams, was in conjunction with Neptune on the cusp between the psychic sign Cancer and Leo. This will give Doris a tendency to dream her life away. She will want to live in a beautiful fairyland of sublime visions, but will not be inclined to exert herself so that her dreams may come true. She is going to have an easy life for there is not a single unfavorable aspect in the figure. It is from such aspects that we get the shocks and jolts which cause us to exert ourselves and climb the pathway of life. Therefore, in kindness to her you must supply the missing incentive so that she will have to do her share of the world’s work in looking after herself, and after others as well; the only real happiness comes by feeling that you have some mission and are filling a place in the family or community.

The Sun is strong in his exaltation sign Aries on the second cusp, where he has rule over the finances. He is trine to the Moon, which is placed in Leo in his own sign. This shows that Doris will always have plenty of the world’s goods to do with, which gives her an added responsibility, for in the final analysis we are only stewards of that which we possess. Unless we put it to good use we shall sometimes have to give an account for our misconduct of the affairs entrusted to us. Therefore Doris’ education ought to include the right use of money, how to distinguish between thrift and meanness, generosity and lavishness, discrimination in giving, etc. She will be so placed in life that she will have the opportunity to give to others, but no matter how generous she may be, unless she learns to give herself with her gifts it will have no value from the spiritual point of view. This will require an expenditure of energy which she may not like to make unless her early training develops a sense of duty which will impel her from within to overcome the tendency to self-indulgence shown by the horoscope.

Doris' mental qualities are good, for Mars, planet of dynamic energy, and Jupiter, the planet of benevolence, are in conjunction with Mercury, planet of the concrete mind. Mercury rises before the Sun, which along with the trine configuration of the Sun with the Moon, shows an un-commonly bright mind. Moreover, Saturn is in the mercurial sign Gemini and thereby strengthens the power of concentration so that Doris is going to make herself felt in whatever circle she is placed in life. Everyone instinctively recognizes and bows to a superior mentality, especially when it is not domineering but kindly and considerate, as indicated by Jupiter conjunction Mercury. Venus, the planet of love, in the humane sign Aquarius and in the twelfth house which denotes prisons and hospitals, gives us the impression that she may eventually takes up some work in connection with institutions of that class. At any rate, whatsoever work she may do in the world will have some connection with charity.

With respect to the health, we find that Doris has an excellent constitution. Jupiter, Mercury, and Mars on the Ascendant, as also the placement of the Sun in its exaltation sign Aries in the first house, in trine to the Moon, which rules the female functions, are all evidences of a splendid constitution, which will stand all the ravages of time. Should at any period of life passing planetary conditions cause illness, it will be short, and she will recuperate so quickly that it will surprise all.

The weakest point in the chart is shown by Saturn in Gemini, which rules the lungs, but even there a trine to Venus protects her. So, taken in its entirety, this is an extremely good horoscope, save for the fact that it shows none of the troubles which we need to make life really worth while from the spiritual point of view. We therefore trust that Doris will find in other people's lives the sorrows that will awaken in her the needed sympathy.

### <h3 id="linzee-g">Linzee G. - Born April 1, 1911, 11 a.m., Hyannis, Massachusetts.</h3>

At the time of Linzee's birth the weak sign Cancer was rising, with Neptune there square to Mercury. If this were the only testimony concerning her constitution, it would show a very low vitality, but the Sun, which is the giver of life, and Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, were both elevated at the time of Linzee's birth, and in good aspect. Both of these planets are strong vital energizers and their position and aspect will do much to counteract the other influences and strengthen the brain and constitution.

While we are upon the subject of health, we may also note that Saturn is singularly free from bad aspects in this horoscope, so that in this way there is also an indirect strengthening of the nature. However, it is a rule, which we have never known to fail, that even apart from bad aspects the place where Saturn is found in the horoscope is always a weak point and apt to bring suffering. We may, therefore, judge that the presence of Saturn in Taurus, the sign which rules the throat, shows a liability to cold in that part of the body, and probably a swelling of the glands which may sometimes obstruct the passages. Do not, however, wrap her up in order to save her from colds, but instead, try to inure her to cold and strengthen the throat so that she may become immune.

The Moon and Venus are placed in Taurus in opposition to Jupiter in Scorpio, the sign which governs the generative organs. As the Moon rules the tides in the universe, so does it rule the fluids of the body and particularly the periodical flow at the monthly periods, and this opposition will have a tendency to make the menstrual flow exceedingly copious. It will, therefore, be particularly wise to instruct this child concerning the changes which take place at puberty, so that she may not be unduly frightened and will know how to care for herself when that time comes.

With respect to the mind, we find that Saturn, the planet of obstruction, is in conjunction with the Moon, signifying the instinctual mind. This gives equipoise and the ability to concentrate. It may, therefore, be called a very fortunate configuration with respect to the mental qualities, but Mercury, the planet of reason, is square to Uranus, the planet of intuition. This position also gives mental activity, but makes the person who has it apt to jump at the wrong conclusion and to become critical, sarcastic, skeptical, and impulsive in speech. Naturally a person of such a turn of mind is not a favorite among her associates, and if that phase of her character is allowed to develop, it will bring her trouble with friends and relatives, make her exceedingly restless under all conditions, and anxious to seek new fields, no matter how well she may be off where she is. That is an extremely unfortunate trend, and you should do your best to counteract it by discouraging, under all conditions, criticism and sarcasm. Teach her that no matter where she goes there will always be troubles with someone, that nothing is perfect in this world, and therefore it will be better for her to try to fit into conditions where she is than to run from one place to another.

Mercury is also square to Neptune, its higher octave, and this position will tend to make her irresolute, vacillating, and dreamy; psychic phenomena will have an almost uncanny attraction for her. When anyone approaches the invisible world under such a configuration, he or she always comes into contact with the least desirable element there. Mediumship is an exceedingly dangerous matter, and you should never allow her to attend any place, meeting, or circle where there is the slightest chance that she may come in touch with those undesirable conditions.

The Sun is the general significator of the marriage partner for a woman, and the sextile between the Sun and Mars will make Linzee exceedingly attractive to the opposite sex; this constitutes a danger during courtship. We find also that Jupiter, the planet of benevolence, attraction, expansion, and joviality is in the fifth house, which governs courtship, in the sign Scorpio, which rules the generative organs, in adverse aspect with Mars, which signifies the suitors. This shows that no matter how good and pure her own thoughts and ideals may be, she will be extremely liable to insults. The Moon and Venus in opposition to Jupiter, together with Mercury square Neptune, shows that she is apt to be slandered whether or not she has done wrong. This is a very sad fate which has spoiled and embittered many a life, and the parents should therefore endeavor to teach Linzee from the earliest childhood days the virtue of circumspection and the avoidance of even the slightest appearance of evil.

Fortunately, as we have often said before, the horoscope shows only tendencies. The stars have no power to compel us to do anything contrary to our own will, and we may therefore alter our horoscope by sufficient will power. There is no configuration so evil that it may not be turned into a stepping stone to good, especially when the matter is taken in hand during the days of childhood, and we therefore trust that you may be able to guide your child clear of the rocks by knowing just where they are placed.

### <h3 id="marion-s">Marion S. – Born April 16, 1904, 11:30 a.m., Denver, Colorado.</h3>

At the time of Marion's birth, the celestial sign Leo was rising, and its ruler, the Sun, was at the same time near the zenith in its exaltation sign, Aries. This will give Marion an abundance of vitality, force, and strength, so that she will experience very little sickness in her life. When her health does fail under unfavorable planetary configurations it will only be for a short time and she will recuperate quickly. Saturn is square to Mercury from Taurus and Aquarius, both signs of voice. This shows that her throat will be one of the weakest points in her anatomy and that she will be liable to colds which will affect the voice. We also find that Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, is in conjunction with the Moon, which governs the female functions, and as this conjunction occurs in Taurus we may judge that there will be a reflex action felt in the opposite sign, Scorpio, which rules the genitals. This will indicate a tendency to copious menses, and the child is just now at the age when she ought be prepared for that event so that she will not be unduly frightened when it happens.

We find Jupiter, the planet of benevolence, and Venus, the planet of love in the ninth house, which governs the higher mind. This shows that Marion's disposition is basically kind and good. However, Mars and the Moon in Taurus, a sign which governs the tongue, voice, and expression, shows that she has a way of expressing herself impulsively and bluntly, so that she is exceedingly apt to give offense to people without meaning to do so at all. This is a tendency which you should by all means try to curb in her, for people naturally resent anything we may say when our manner is rough. We make enemies of them no matter how good our intentions were in the first place. It is always better to clothe one's words in a cloak of politeness and suavity, which will make friends for us, than to ride rough-shod over people and turn them into enemies. Seeing that this configuration occurs in a fixed sign, you will find it very difficult to change her and it will probably require hard knocks of life and experience. Nevertheless, if you can point out to her how this is shown in her horoscope and the way to overcome it, perhaps it may have the effect of bringing about a cure quicker than would otherwise be the case. At any rate, there is no harm in trying.

We also find that Saturn, the planet of diplomacy, is square to Mercury, the planet of mind and reason. This will give Marion a tendency to be untruthful, a proclivity which should certainly be curbed, for no one who practises deception can ever be really happy and contented. There must always be a fear of detection and consequent disgrace, and then there is the penalty thereto that when people find a person to be a prevaricator, they never rely on his statement after that, taking everything else he says with a grain of salt.

Marion has a good mind and a quick wit, for the Sun and Moon are highly elevated and parallel, both of them in their exaltation signs, even the square of Mercury to Saturn deepens the mind and makes it more capable of concentration. Therefore, if you can reason these things out with her, we believe she will listen and take heed. Neptune is in the psychic sign Cancer and placed in the twelfth house, which denotes mediumship. It is square to Venus in the ninth house which governs the higher mind. This shows that Marion is sensitive, but if you should allow her to come into a spiritualistic circle where there are invisible spirit-controls they would be very apt to seize upon her and force her into mediumship. You should, therefore, be very careful not to allow her to attend such seances or in other ways associate with people who have already attracted that kind of Spirits.

With regard to Marion's financial circumstances, you may feel easy, for the Sun, which rules the second house, is highly elevated, exalted, and parallel to the Moon, all signs which show comfortable circumstances. The Sun is trine to Uranus in the fifth house, which indicates, among other things, educational enterprises. Uranus is the planet of science. It is in the sign Sagittarius, which denotes religion, law or philosophy. The Sun signifies the government or employer in a high position. Therefore, we may judge that Marion will find her vocation in a government position connected with science and education, and she ought to shape her study with that end in view. This should be easy for her, for the Sun trine Uranus, the planet of intuition, will give her a quick solution to all her problems without the necessity of reasoning them out.

It is doubtful if Marion will want to marry, for Saturn is in the seventh house. If she does, it will be to a person much older than herself, and while it may advance her socially because the Sun is in the tenth house (the Sun is the general significator of marriage for a woman and the tenth house signifies the social position), it will be best for her not to enter into such a union, which is sacrilege unless there is mutual love. Besides, as said, she will by her own efforts become very comfortably situated and be much happier without marriage.

### <h3 id="carlos-de-u">Carlos de U. - Born April 18, 1915, 10:15 p.m., Brighton, England.</h3>

Seeking the mental caliber of Carlos, we find that Mercury is in the martial sign Aries and that it rises before the Sun. This always makes for a bright mind. We also find the Moon in the mercurial sign Gemini and sextile to Mercury. This is another favorable indication. Then we find that Uranus, the planet of intuition, is in the intellectual sign Aquarius sextile to Mercury and trine to the Moon, showing that the youngster will have an exceptionally brilliant mind. Furthermore, Saturn, the planet of obstruction, is also in Gemini and sextile to the Sun so that it is absolutely safe to designate Carlos as a genius of an exceptional nature. Moreover, he will not be erratic, on account of the restraining hand of Saturn already mentioned.

We would urge you, however, to be careful to restrain him during the earlier years, for both Mars and Sun are in Aries, which rules the head. This gives too much heat in the brain, and there is a square aspect between Saturn and Mars demanding caution. Let him learn whatever he wants to himself, be it little or much, but do not force him and try to make an infant prodigy of him, for that may have serious consequences. It is far better to train his body during the earlier years so that it may become a fit instrument of a great mind later in life. You should be especially careful in respect to his food, for Saturn is on the cusp of Cancer, which rules the stomach, and that means there is a tendency to indigestion if Carlos is allowed to have his own way with food. He will want to eat more than he can take care of on account of Mars in Aries.

You will find that he is not going to be an easy child to bring up, with Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, in Aries, together with the Sun. He will be very impulsive and self-willed and Saturn being about to enter Cancer, the fourth sign which signifies the home, will render him resentful of parental authority in particular. We would therefore advise that you mark out a definite line of conduct which will allow him freedom in all unessential things, so that you may not form the habit of always saying "Don't." But, on the other hand, the things which you settle by careful study of the matter as being essential and requiring obedience for the child's good should be enforced from the earliest childhood.

We do not believe in corporal punishment, but every child likes certain things which are delicacies, and if a disobedience is always followed by a denial of these things the child usually learns to bow to the will of the parents. You will also find that he has a temper, and if this makes it impossible to guide him by ordinary means, it is a good plan to place a mirror in a corner of the room and seat the child so that he is forced to look into this glass and there see his face distorted with tears and anger. This treatment will quickly make him smile and he can then be taken out of the corner.

When you buy toys for Carlos, select those which are mechanical and electrical in preference to others, for as Uranus and the Moon are sextile to Mercury and placed in airy signs, it is evident that his talents will lie in the direction of inventions that have to do with electricity and the air. For that reason toys of the nature suggested will help to bring out in him the latent ability to a much better advantage than if he were given dolls and blocks to play with. Neptune in the eighth house and in the psychic sign Cancer will give him a love of the occult, but as the Sun is square from the sign Aries which governs the head, his experiences in this direction will have a mentally disturbing influence. He is apt to be pestered by spirit controls and he should, therefore, be kept away from such things.

### <h3 id="henry-f">Henry F. - Born July 4, 1905, 12:30 a.m., Schenectady, New York.</h3>

Here we have a youngster coming into the world amid the rejoicing incidental to the nation's birthday, with Taurus on the ascendant and the gentle Venus and Jupiter rising, sextile to the Moon and Mercury, significators of mind, thus giving him a benevolent optimistic disposition. Although this is somewhat toned down by the square of Saturn, the planet of obstruction, to Jupiter, the planet of benevolence, it will, nevertheless, have the tendency to turn the corners of Henry's mouth upward and give him a feeling of optimism even under trying circumstances. Thus he will become popular among his associates, for such people are always well received and much sought after. There is no truer saying than "Laugh and the world laughs with you, weep and you weep alone."

Mercury is ruler of the second house, which governs finances, and the Moon always brings into action any planet wherewith she is in aspect. We may therefore judge that the aspect of the Moon and Mercury to Jupiter, the planet of opulence, will give Henry an ample income. However, the eleventh house position of Saturn in the twelfth-house sign Pisces, square to Jupiter, shows that Henry's friends, particularly people who are older than himself, will cause him financial trouble unless he can learn in time to keep out of their clutches. He should be taught to discriminate between friends who only seek him for their own self-interest and to his detriment, and those who really seek him for himself.

The conjunction of Neptune with the Sun in the psychic sign, Cancer, shows Henry to be mystically inclined, and the sextile of Mercury and the Moon to Jupiter and Venus will further accentuate the religious tendencies. Moreover, since Henry is not by any means a negative character he will profit considerably from these configurations without danger to himself.

The indications regarding Henry's health are exceedingly favorable. Venus and Jupiter rising in the rugged sign Taurus give him a strong robust body, and the Sun, which is the giver of life, trine to Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, shows that he will have an abundance of vital energy all through life. There is only one adverse testimony: Saturn, the planet of obstruction, is square to Jupiter, the planet which governs the arterial circulation. This we believe is more than offset by the trine of Sun and Mars though it may give Henry poor circulation in the feet, which are governed by the sign Pisces, where Saturn is found. The sextile of Jupiter and Venus placed in the ASC in Taurus, sextile to Mercury and the Moon, shows musical talent, which should be cultivated. Probably that is the best vocation for Henry, for we find Virgo and Libra in the sixth house, indicating that his service to the world should come from Venus and Mercury.

### <h3 id="josephine-m">Josephine M. - Born May 10, 1905, 4:15 p.m., Mountain Home, Idaho.</h3>

Here we have a young lady with an exceedingly well-fortified seventh house. There we find the Sun, which for a woman is the significator of the marriage partner; Jupiter, the planet of benevolence; Venus, the planet of love and coalition, and Mercury, the principal significator of the mind. There can, therefore, be no question that Josephine's sphere of life is in the home. There are all the elements of success for her in this life. The Sun and Jupiter, the planet of opulence, on the cusp of the eighth house which indicates the finances of the marriage partner, shows that he will be well-to-do and generous.

There is also an element of trouble immanent in this figure, though, which will come from Josephine herself, and unless it is checked it will mar her happiness. Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, is in Scorpio in opposition to the Sun and Jupiter. This will give her a very violent temper, and the marriage partner will be the particular victim thereof. We find the Moon, which is one of the significators of mind, in the sign of the heart, Leo, and square to Mercury and Venus in Aries, the sign of the head, showing that Josephine will develop an exceedingly jealous nature which may eventually cause a rupture in the marriage relation. On account of these indications, it is the first duty of the parents to strive from the very earliest childhood to teach her control of temper. She is now at an age where these things can be explained to her by the object lessons which, unfortunately, are only too frequent occurrences in our social life. She also has a strong tendency toward reckless extravagance on account of the influence of Mars in the second house, which governs finances. This ought to be checked as much as possible.

With regard to her health, Mars in Scorpio, opposition the Sun, shows a tendency toward copious menses, for Scorpio governs the genitals. It would therefore be well for the parents to instruct her carefully in advance of the occurrence so that she may know how to take care of herself and not become unduly frightened. Saturn in Pisces, the sign which governs the feet, shows a tendency to cold in these extremities, and for one with the aforementioned tendency that may cause serious consequences, which you would do well to guard her against in the severe northern climate where you are living. The Moon square Venus and Mercury also indicates disturbances to the health, particularly through over-indulgence in pleasure and worry. There is a tendency to be very sarcastic and quicken-spoken, which you should endeavor to curb by reasoning with her, for such an attitude of mind causes unpopularity, and the worry that follows has a reflex action upon the health. Fortunately, however, it is possible for a person who has the will to modify the influences indicated in the horoscope and thus change the undesirable tendencies to something better.

### <h3 id="frances-w">Frances W. - Born September 15, 1903, at 11 p.m., Seattle, Washington</h3>

Here we have a young lady of unusual ability in the occult direction. Uranus in the mental sign Sagittarius, sextile to Mercury, the significator of mind, shows her to be a very ingenious, independent, and original thinker; Jupiter, the planet of religion, in the zenith position, essentially dignified in the mystic sign Pisces, trine to Neptune on the ASC in the psychic sign Cancer, shows in another way an extreme occult ability. Furthermore, as the tenth house shows the social position and prestige, we judge from Jupiter's presence there that she may in time attain a national or perhaps an international reputaton. The aspects being from watery signs show a great deal of travel in connection therewith, though it should not be forgotten that these testimonies are somewhat minimized by the fact that Jupiter is retrograde. However, it is certain that she has an unusual ability to delve into the occult.

Frances' inspiration and intuition are far above the normal, and the Sun conjunction Venus in the mercurial sign Virgo shows her to be of a kind-hearted and sympathetic nature, though the Moon square Mercury indicates that she may be very quick-spoken and impatient of others who do not grasp things as quickly as she. This tendency should be checked for it will make her unpopular if indulged and allowed to grow. From this aspect she also gets a tendency to worry over things which never come to pass, but perhaps that is natural for sensitives. They are very much exposed to the conditions of others, it being difficult to differentiate between

what really affects oneself and what comes from other people. At least, it takes an effort to make the distinction, which one is not always prepared to make, nor is one always conscious that such an effort is necessary.

The Sun and Venus sextile to Mars shows that Frances will be very popular and attractive to the opposite sex, which is both proper and legitimate. There is also a square of Sun and Venus to Uranus, the planet which loves liberty and hates conventionality. This means that unless she is very circumspect she is likely to be taken advantage of and become the subject of a scandal. You will, therefore, do well to instruct her in regard to these matters and look after her very carefully until she has finally settled down. However, you need have no fear regarding the ultimate outcome. The Sun conjunction Venus in the fourth house is one of the best testimonies of a home life filled with love and happiness, especially in the latter part of life, for it makes the fortunate person who has it so loving and companionable that all about her feel her charm. This aspect is also a good indication of comfortable financial circumstances, so that, though there may be some trouble in life, it may be said that on the whole Frances has a most fortunate life before her.

With respect to health, we find that the Moon is rising in Cancer and square to Mercury in Libra. This shows a somewhat delicate constitution with the stomach and kidneys neys as the weaker points from which trouble may be expected. The constitution, however, is considerably strengthened by Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, sextile to the lifegiving Sun. Saturn is fortunately unaspected and retrograde but, nevertheless, he always makes some trouble wherever he is placed or from the opposite point. As he is in Aquarius and the opposite sign is Leo, which governs the heart, we may judge that it will have a slightly obstructive effect upon the circulation, and this will most probably be felt in the ankles which are governed by Aquarius. More damage is done to the heart during careless, impatient, impulsive youth than in after years, and as the constitution of Frances is none too strong, every slightest strain counts. We would, therefore, advise you to acquaint her with these facts so that she may learn to husband her energy from the earliest possible time, and thus prevent trouble in the later years.

### <h3 id="henry-b-w">Henry B. W. - Born Nov. 6, 1914, 9:20 a.m., Luling, Texas.</h3>

Here is a youngster with a well-developed wanderlust, indicated by an essentially dignified Mars in the watery sign Scorpio on the ASC, trine to Neptune in the ninth house, which governs travel. The wandering Moon is posited in the mercurial sign Gemini to further accentuate this tendency, and the Sun square to Uranus, which is the great inculcator of personal freedom and liberty, shows that Henry will always be looking for a change, always hastening toward the far fields that look so much greener than the ones where he happens to be. This is so ingrained in his nature that we believe it will be useless for you or him to combat it. It is not a bad tendency, either, for it certainly gives breadth of view and experience. It makes life interesting. People with such tendencies are rolling stones that gather no moss in the shape of worldly possessions, but they usually accumulate a fund of knowledge that is very valuable to the Spirit. After all is said and done that is what counts, for no one can take his material possessions along with him when he passes through the gate of death, but whatever knowledge he has acquired will stay with him through eternity. The trine aspect between Mars and Neptune shows, however, that Henry will enjoy the roving life and find a happiness therein, so that even from the standpoint of present conditions there are no regrets necessary.

Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, rising in its own sign, Scorpio, will give Henry an abundant fund of physical vitality, but it will also give him the tendency to be quick-tempered and impatient with others. This tendency is modified by the mental significations, however, which are quite interesting. Mercury, the planet of mind and reason, goes before the Sun, which is good, but it is too close to the Day-star and square to Jupiter. The Moon also, though placed in the mercurial sign Gemini, is unasepected. Thus Henry will never be a good reasoner. If he should rely upon that faculty in his dealings with the world he would always be subject to trouble and loss. But Venus, the planet of love, is sextile to Uranus, the planet of intuition, and Jupiter, the planet of benevolence. This modifies the other mental significations and smoothes out the temper indicated by Mars on the ASC in Scorpio, so that Henry will intuitively and without the use of his reasoning faculties arrive at conclusions which will generally be found to be correct. We say generally, because the square aspect between Jupiter and Mercury affects this indication in a slightly adverse manner, but he will grow up to be an exceedingly bright young man with an inclination toward invention, particularly in the line of electricity and aerial instruments. The square aspect of Jupiter to the Sun and Mercury in the twelfth house shows that he ought to be careful in the way he handles these forces, for otherwise they will be somewhat dangerous to him.

With respect to health we find that Saturn is in the sign Cancer, which rules the stomach. This shows that Henry ought to be careful in his diet or indigestion will result in time. If you teach him frugality by your own example and also preach this doctrine to him during childhood it will undoubt edly have a beneficial effect and save him much misery. Mars in Scorpio on the ASC shows a strong tendency toward con stipation, which is an adjunct of indigestion. The child should be taught from the earliest years to be regular in his elimina tion and always follow the call of nature, no matter where he is. Save for these two weak points the constitution is strong, and the general health will be good if he is taught to overcome the weakness indicated.

### <h3 id="mildred-costa-i">Mildred Costa I. - Born Jan. 20, 1916, 9:38 p.m., Los Angeles, California.</h3>

Four cardinal signs were on the angles at the time of Mildred's birth, giving her an inherently active and rest less disposition. Uranus, the intuitional, spasmodic planet, is in conjunction with Mercury in the intellectual sign Aquarius. This gives her an original, intuitive, quick, and alert mind, with a tendency, however, to be very independent and resentful of restraint and restriction. She will want her way regardless of the conventionalities.

The Moon, which is another significator of mind, is in opposition to Uranus. This will further strengthen the imagination and make it exceedingly fertile, so that we have before us a very unusual character which the parents will find it very difficult if not impossible to train. Most of the planets are in fixed signs, and the saying "If she will she will, and you can depend upon it, if she won't she won't, and that's the end on it," applies with particular force to Mildred. However, you have seven years at least before you in which much good work may be done, and you have some unusually promising material to work with before the vital body, which is the vehicle of habit, has set and the undesirable tendencies have become ingrained. She is very much in need of poise and self control to guide her unusual ability into proper channels, and now is the time for her to learn it, if ever. Be sure that you use moderation, though.

Mildred has Saturn, the planet of obstruction, in Cancer, the fourth sign signifying the home. This shows the restraining hand of parents, but it should be laid on as lightly as possible, for there is nothing that kills ambition and breaks the progressive spirit in a child as much as the parental "Don't, don't, don't."

Financially, Mildred will be well taken care of, for the Sun, which infuses life into all things it touches and that come in contact with its rays, is sextile to Jupiter, the planet of opulence. Jupiter's position in the sixth house, which governs service, shows that she will always be popular with employers and other employees. She will indeed be so well liked that people in high and fixed positions signified by the Sun will, by their influence, secure her promotion to a place of prominence. Should she become an employer herself or have charge over other employees she will be very successful, and popular in the management of them, gaining much through them. Not se with respect to friends, though, for in the eleventh house we find the Moon in opposition to Uranus, and Mars in opposition to Venus. This shows that her friends will always seek to use her for their own benefit and then slander her behind her back. Therefore, Mildred should be very careful in the selection of her friends. People who have such original dispositions are always likely to be misunderstood and therefore be the subject of slander.

With respect to health, we find Uranus in conjunction with Mercury and in opposition to the Moon from the signs Leo and Aquarius, which govern the spinal column, and Neptune is in opposition to the Sun, which is also on the cusp of Aquarius. This will give Mildred a supersensitive, nervous disposition which should not be unduly taxed. It is like a fine watch or chronometer which needs to be in a balanced frame. It is much more valuable than a cheap alarm clock but cannot stand the same rough treatment. So it is with Mildred. She is too sensitive to withstand severe nervous strain, and during the school period it will be best for her not to study too hard. She will learn far more intuitively than her schoolmates by the hardest kind of a grind.

The Moon, which governs the female functions, is in opposition to Uranus, the spasmodic planet, and therefore you may find her irregular in her menses, but the life-giving Sun is sextile to Jupiter, the planet of plenty. This gives good fortune and good measure in health as in wealth and happiness, counter-balancing the minor tendencies, so that on the whole Mildred will enjoy good health through life.

### <h3 id="robert-leonard-l">Robert Leonard L. - Born Oct. 18, 1907, 9:30 a.m., Spokane, Washington.</h3>

One glance at this horoscope is sufficient to show us that Robert will be a very versatile character. The planets are scattered over the greater part of the horoscope, and we find Mercury, the planet of reason, in the martial sign Scorpio, showing that he is mentally energetic, quick, and alert, though not impulsive, for Mercury is singularly well-aspected. It has a trine to Saturn, the planet of obstruction, which gives caution, tact, diplomacy, forethought, and the ability to concentrate deeply upon any subject so that he may know what he is going into before actually taking the venture. Mercury is also trine to the Moon, which is co-significator with him of the mind. This helps to strengthen the imagination and gives the ability to visualize the thoughts and ideas conceived by him. Finally, Mercury is trine to its higher octave Neptune, which is placed in the psychic sign Cancer. This will have a tendency to bring Robert in touch with occultism, for the configuration occurs from the eighth and twelfth houses. It will make him sensitive to the vibrations from the invisible worlds and may be the means of giving him psychic experiences of a nature that will benefit him spiritually.

We find Jupiter, the planet of religion and philosophy, in the ninth house, governing the higher mind. This will make Robert's nature benevolent, helpful, and sympathetic. It will give him high aspirations and bring him much esteem in the community in connection with social and religious work. The Sun and Venus placed in the eleventh house, the house of friends, hopes, and aspirations, is a good omen in that respect. Robert will meet with many friends, people higher in the social scale, who will help him advance in life. He will also find many friends among the opposite sex, but as Venus is sextile to Uranus, the planet of originality and independence, we may judge that his relations with them will be rather too unconventional.

Venus in Scorpio square Mars, the ruler of Scorpio, will give him unusually strong sexual tendencies, and there are indications that this may bring him into trouble, besides sapping his vitality. We believe it would be wise for you to take Robert to a physician that it may be determined whether circumcision is advisable. Where there is a superfluity of flesh there is also an irritation which additionally excites an already abnormal tendency, and the removal thereof does much to relieve the person afflicted with an intense passional nature.

Saturn in Pisces, which governs the feet, shows that Robert will have a poor circulation in the extremities, which may react in the intestines governed by the opposite sign Virgo, but as Saturn is unafflicted there will probably be no serious inconvenience. Had this been a female horoscope the conjunction with the Moon would have affected the health much more seriously by obstruction of the female functions. As it is, the effect will probably be confined to cold feet.

In respect to finances, we see Uranus in the second house and sextile to Venus, and Mars also in the second, square to Venus. This shows that Robert will always have considerable money. He has an excellent earning power, but we also find that there will be a tendency to squander his substance on the opposite sex. He has already passed the plastic age, and unfortunately the indications occur from fixed signs so that you will probably find it difficult to change him now. However, it is better to make the attempt late than not at all. We would advise that when you give him an allowance you should require him to give an account of how he has spent it and advise him what is right and what is wrong in that respect. There is one blessing: he has a reasonable mind and you may be able to show him logically which is the best course for him to pursue. We would also advise that you teach him the sacredness of sex, together with the dreadful consequences attendant upon the abuse thereof. He has a very strong will power, and if you can convince him of these matters, it is quite possible that he may be able to rule his stars in that respect. At least he will not go blindly into something with which he is unacquainted. His eyes will be opened and there is the possibility that he may catch himself up sooner than if he is not warned at all.

### <h3 id="arminae-b">Arminae B. - Born June 11, 1915, 5:24 p.m., Seattle, Washington.</h3>

At the time of Arminae's birth we find the energetic sign Scorpio rising and Mars, the ruler, sextile to Mercury. This gives her a quick and alert mind, able to grasp an idea the moment it is presented. At the same time, she is not impulsive, for Mercury, the planet of reason, is in conjunction with Saturn, the planet of obstruction. This acts as a brake upon impulse and gives her the ability to concentrate upon whatever subject comes under her notice, but unfortunately, this position also carries with it the tendency to the blues and evil forebodings, especially when placed in the lunar sign Cancer.

The Moon, planet of imagination, is in the mercurial sign Gemini, trine to Uranus, the planet of intuition, placed in the intellectual sign Aquarius. This further sharpens the intellectual faculties so that it will not be necessary for her to reason upon things in order to arrive at a correct conclusion; she will gain the solution to her problems mostly by intuition. This configuration will also give her originality and independence of thought.

With respect to marriage, we find that Venus, the planet of love, is essentially dignified in her own sign Taurus, sextile to Jupiter, the planet of benevolence, also essentially dignified in the sign Pisces. Venus is placed in the seventh house, indicating the condition of marriage, sextile to Neptune in the fourth sign Cancer, and Jupiter is in the fourth house. Thus conditions are extremely favorable for a happy marriage and a contented home life. But the Sun, which indicates the marriage partner in a woman's horoscope is on the cusp of the eighth house, indicating his financial condition, and square to Jupiter, the planet of opulence, in the fourth house. This shows that there is a liability to financial difficulties and loss, but there are no indications of poverty. Quite the contrary.

There does not seem to be any particular or glaring fault in Arminae, and the general state of the health is also good. Saturn in Cancer always gives a tendency toward some peculiarity in the choice of food, and if this is indulged in his conjunction with Mercury will cause nervous indigestion. But even this will probably not be of a very aggravated nature in her case, as the planets are full six degrees apart and therefore weak in their operation. So to sum up: the life is shown to be a quiet and contented one, passed mostly in the home and filled with the cares and pleasures of a family.

### <h3 id="ellis-eldon-d">Ellis Eldon D. - Born Feb. 25, 1907, 3p.m., Harper County, Oklahoma.</h3>

This is a strong horoscope, strong for good and for bad. There are four cardinal signs on the angles, giving Ellis an active, energetic nature. Saturn, the ruler of the Capricorn ASC, is in conjunction with Mercury. This deepens the mind and gives him power of concentration, but also a tendency to look upon the dark side of things. This, however, is considerably modified by a sextile to Venus, the planet of love, light, and cheerfulness, so that probably the gloom will not be as deep as otherwise. Furthermore, the life-giving Sun is trine to Jupiter, the planet of optimism, also to Neptune, and sextile to Uranus, the planet of intuition. These are all influences which brighten the disposition and throw sunshine into the life.

However, Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, is in the twelfth house, indicating sorrow and self-undoing, square to Saturn, the planet of obstruction. This indicates that Ellis will have an unusually quick and violent temper, which is apt to bring him into trouble. It makes the nature cruel, selfish, and deceptive, and on that account it breeds enmity with those about him. It even indicates a liability to imprisonment. Unfortunately, he is already ten years of age, and the best period for work with him is therefore past. Nevertheless, the affliction occurs from common or flexible signs, and there are so many other good traits in this horoscope, that it seems that even now you should be able to mould his character in such a manner that you will at least minimize the tendency. Probably you have already noticed these characteristics in embryonic manifestation and have already battled with them. In that case, it should be possible to help him overcome. Above all things, try to each him how to curb his temper, for without doubt whatever trouble comes to him will be because he loses control of himself and acts rashly on the impulse of the moment.

So far as the financial fortunes go, Ellis will have many ups and downs in life. The Sun is trine to Jupiter, the planet of opulence, so that at times fortune will smile upon him and give him abundantly of the world's goods, often in the most sudden and unexpected manner, as indicated by the sextile of the Sun and Uranus. But then, the square of Mars from the twelfth house, the house of sorrow, will bring losses and financial difficulties. He will have a considerable amount of money, but will not be able to keep it.

Concerning health, the constitution is physically strong, but the square of Mars to the Sun and Saturn shows a liability to colds and fevers, inflammatory diseases and accidents, a sensual nature which will sap his vitality. In short, as we said in the beginning of the horoscope reading, it is a strong nature divided between good and bad, and according to whatever he chooses the life will be happy or unhappy. There is one blessing, though, in that this horoscope shows a considerable amount of latitude of free will, so that Ellis will have a chance to choose for himself without being very seriously handicapped. If you can only aid him in the matter of self-control, you will minimize the tendencies to trouble wonderfully, and enhance his chances for a successful and happy life in the same degree.

### <h3 id="mildredr-b">Mildred B. – Born April 6, 1905, 11:15 a.m., Wichita, Kansas.</h3>

Here we have an interesting young lady who is a natural inspirational musician, as shown by the four planets in Taurus, the sign of art and music. We find Venus, the planet of love and harmony, there, and in this sign she is essentially dignified; we also find the Moon, which fructifies everything on earth, talents included. There is also Mercury, the planet of expression and dexterity, giving Mildred the ability not only to learn music and love music, but to perform and express herself in that manner, and last but not least, Jupiter, the planet of devotion and ideals. These planets are all in the eleventh house which rules hopes, wishes, and aspirations, showing that Mildred's ideals and ambitions will be realized, and we may also say that the Sun is in its exaltation sign Aries, where it is very strong and powerful. It travels one degree a year approximately from the time of birth. Thus at fourteen years of age it enters the sign Taurus, and at eighteen comes in conjunction with Mercury, then the Moon, then Jupiter and Venus. So from the age of eighteen to twenty-five Mildred may expect her dreams to be coming true in a most wonderful manner, and at twenty-nine when the Sun comes in conjunction with Venus she will meet a life companion and gain her heart's desires, for the Sun in a female horoscope always signifies the marriage partner.

Mildred is not one who floats in the skies and dreams dreams only, for Saturn, the planet of tact and diplomacy, concentration, system, virtue, etc., is sextile to Mercury, the Moon, and Jupiter. This will give her a level head and clear, keen reasoning powers. There is, however, a "but" to all this and an "if." That is to say, we find that the Sun, which is the giver of life, and Mars, which is the planet of dynamic energy, are unaspected. Both of them are strong, the Sun is highly elevated and exalted, and Mars is essentially dignified in Scorpio, but being unaspected they are not as strong factors in the horoscope as when configurated with other planets. Therefore she may not have or express the proper energy necessary to realize all the best there is in her life, and she should be made to realize clearly that the horoscope only shows tendencies but does not bring things to pass unless we work with it.

It is necessary for everyone to help their stars, or their stars cannot help them. Let us take an illustration.. The human system is to a great extent automatic, and when we have accustomed ourselves to eat dinner at twelve o'clock, then we will automatically feel hunger at that time. Thus we are being urged by this craving for food to go and get our dinner, but though the craving may appear, unless we walk to the table and do the physical work of eating and masticating our food, the hunger will remain. It is the same with the aspects in the horoscope. They will give the inner urge and the opportunity for the realization of every quality and everything good or bad, but unless we ourselves help to bring these things about they will remain latent. Mildred is old enough now to understand this point and realize that she must do some work herself or otherwise the things indicated in her horoscope cannot come to pass. She cannot develop her musical faculties by just simply sitting down and dreaming of some day being in a grand concert hall where she is the cynosure of all eyes and all ears while she is producing marvelous symphonies. She must go through the usual course and begin with little things before she can do great ones. She must do the work and then in time she will realize her ambition.

The parents ought to prod her on and encourage her in every possible manner to study. She will be most attracted to and most successful in encompassing the devotional side of music, particularly on the pipe organ. This is shown by the placement of Saturn in the ninth house governing church or religious work, and the inspiration comes from his trine with Neptune in Cancer, the inspirational, psychic sign.

At the time of Mildred's birth, Neptune was rising in Cancer. This configuration suggests a tendency to colds, and Cancer is a sign of poor vitality; hence it will be well to guard Mildred against these tendencies. It also gives a tendency to trouble with the stomach, and Mars in Scorpio is apt to produce hemorrhoids if her desire for highly spiced food is indulged.

### <h3 id="sarah-june-w">Sarah June W. - Born June 14, 1914, 2:30 p.m., Skandaken, New York.</h3>

At the time of Sarah's birth, four cardinal signs were on the angles, giving her an active nature and showing that she will be a leader among her associates in whatever sphere of life she may be placed. However, we find the planets grouped in two clusters. One is up in the ninth and tenth houses near to the zenith; the other is in the fourth and fifth houses, close to the nadir. This shows that Sarah will exert herself particularly in two certain directions; she will not be versatile like the people who have planets scattered all over their horoscopes.

The next thing that strikes us is that we have here a person of an unusual mentality, for Mercury and the Moon, which are significators of the mind, aspect each other by a trine, and Jupiter, the ruler of the ninth sign, is in the intellectual sign Aquarius and trine to the Sun and Saturn, which are in the mercurial sign Gemini. This aspect makes for general success in life and imparts many of the most valuable qualities to the mind and disposition, so that Sarah has a mind of a very deep and profound nature capable of understanding the most abstruse problems and grappling with the deepest phases of learning. It will make her honest, sincere, and just in her dealings with all about her, and will give her a financial ability that will ensure her success in life or make her comfortably situated in that respect. Furthermore, she will not squander whatever means she may possess, but will use them with care and conservatism. From the Sun trine Jupiter she will gain friendship from people in influential positions who will be able to help her materially in life, and she will always conduct herself with such circumspection that she will keep the esteem of people, for she will have a great desire to stand well in the eyes of the community.

In the horoscope of a woman this aspect also offers success in marriage with a rise in the social scale through that event, for the Sun in a woman's horoscope signifies the marriage partner. In the horoscope of a man, it affects the health as the Sun rules that matter in the male figure. The Sun trine Jupiter will also give Sarah a religious disposition and an optimistic attitude of mind, but unfortunately, this aspect is modified by the conjunction of the Sun and Saturn. This always has a tendency to impart gloom to the nature. Therefore it may be expected that Sarah will at times feel gloomy and downcast in mind, though not to a very alarming degree, for this aspect should be more than offset by the sextile of Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, and the trine of Jupiter to the Sun. Their optimism and action tend to counteract the gloomy forces of Saturn. The Sun conjunction Saturn in Gemini will also give Sarah some difficulty in expressing herself. She will never be a chatterbox, and may not have even the ordinary fluency of speech, but what she says will count for it will be the fruit of profound thought.

The conjunction of Venus, the planet of love, art, and beauty, with Neptune and Mercury, which occurs in the emotional and inspirational sign Cancer, shows us that Sarah has musical ability of no mean order, and that she will probably not only be a performer of other people's compositions, but will also be an original composer. This talent should by all means be cultivated, and there is no doubt that she will come to the front. Mars, the planet of dynamic energy in the bold and intrepid sign of the Lion, sextile to the Sun and Saturn, shows that there is not only energy but also a great deal of persistence which will enable her to attain her object in life. She will rise by the sheer force of her ambition, but this remark also brings us to her faults.

She is liable, through the forcefulness of her character and the way in which she may have to battle to get to the front, to become domineering and bombastic, as seen by the opposition of Mars to Jupiter. This tenth house position of Mars and the opposition of Jupiter shows that on that account she will lay herself liable to public criticisms, scandal, and other unpleasantness. You will therefore help her materially if you try to teach her self control, patience, and forbearance. It should not be difficult with a logical, fair, and powerful mind such as she has, to keep her unworthy emotions in check, and thus save herself a great deal of trouble in the future.

With respect to health, we find that the Moon is in conjunction with the Dragon's Head. This is in its effect like the Sun and Jupiter, therefore very good. The Moon is also trine to Mercury and thus we see that the nervous system is of an excellent nature. But the Sun and Saturn being in conjunction in the mercurcial sign Gemini shows that there is a tendency to some obstruction in the lungs, though as already said, the sextile of Mars and the trine of Jupiter will do very much to offset that, so even this configuration may not show itself in any marked manner. An ounce of prevention, however, is worth more than a pound of cure, and in view of this you should therefore take precautions in childhood so that she does not catch cold, or if she does, see that she is properly taken care of. You will then probably save her an attack of illness in later life. Taken all in all, it is a very fortunate horoscope, showing a success in life above the average.

### <h3 id="harriet-josephine-b">Harriet Josephine B. — Born January 31, 1904, 10 p.m., New York City, New York.</h3>

At the time of Harriet's birth, four cardinal signs were on the angles and this is usually a sign of an active life. Unfortunately, however, in her case, Mars, the great reservoir of dynamic energy, is in the common sign Pisces and unaspected. The Sun, which is the lifegiver is also conjoined with the obstructive Saturn. This takes away a great deal of her energy, and Uranus, the planet of spasmodic action, is conjoined with Venus and square to Jupiter. Thus the nature is basically listless and self-indulgent. Therefore, it must be your part as parents to stir her into action, for it is a true saying that an idle brain is the devil's workshop, and idle hands are his choicest tools.

No matter how difficult the task may prove, she must be kept employed in a constructive manner or there will be great trouble in her life. She is now at the age of puberty, and the tendency denoted by Uranus in conjunction with Venus, the planet of love, is particularly dangerous for her at the present time, when she is young and altogether inexperienced. This configuration gives her a tendency to be led astray and she should be very carefully guarded. Mercury, the planet of reason, is sextile to Jupiter. Thus the mind is basically upright, humane, and benevolent. But there is a tendency to see things from the wrong viewpoint with this conjunction of Uranus and Venus; this will also give her a jealous disposition which is likely to bring about estrangement from friends and kindred and difficultly all through life.

Uranus square to Jupiter gives Harriet high aspirations and noble ideals, but it makes the disposition too listless to work for their realization and consequently she is liable to delays and disappointments. This is not a very cheerful reading but you should remember in the first place that the stars do not compel, they only impel; if we can bring our will power to bear, then we may overcome the tendency. This is the object of these readings: to show parents where their children's faults lie, so that they may be corrected and their latent virtues cultivated. Harriet is no dunce by any means, and if you can show her what the tendencies in her life are and bring her to realize that it is necessary for her to use her will-power and infuse energy and activity into her life or it may be a failure, then you may perhaps save her many a heartache. At the same time, you must show her that you are really her friends.

Saturn in the fourth house shows a tendency on the part of the parents to throw a wet blanket on the ambitions of the child. There is a constant admonition, "Don't do this, don't do that, don't do the other things", but this should be changed. Instead, you ought to indicate a line of action that she could take, perhaps that will bring her in line with the life you would like to have her lead. There is no particular glory in bringing up a child that is docile or very near perfection, but when a difficult child comes to us then we have a chance of laying up for ourselves a great deal of treasure in heaven through helping that Ego to surmount the obstacles in its path and live a successful life. We hope that you will see this in the right light and endeavor to do the very best for Harriet, for she certainly needs your help, particularly in the years that are just ahead of her. You can do her no better service than to make the home so attractive to her that she will never care to go out. If she is at any time visiting in other people's homes, she will involuntarily make comparisons between them and her home and say to herself, "There is no place like home." This you can do for her, and then you may save her a great deal of trouble in the next few years from the conjunction of Uranus and Venus, which is the most dangerous aspect in her life at the present time.

### <h3 id="albert-p">Albert P. - Born July 18, 1911, 4:55 p.m., Seattle, Washington.</h3>

At the time of Albert's birth we find Uranus, the planet of independence and originality, in oppostion to Neptune and the Sun, which indicates the individuality, also square with Mars and the Moon. This shows that he is of an exceedingly independent and original nature that will not easily submit to restraint. It will be worse than folly to attempt to rule him by force; there is only one way you can reach him and that is by kindness.

Uranus square to the wandering Moon shows that he will have an intense *wanderlust*, probably from the very earliest years of childhood, and unless you use extreme moderation he is bound to run away from his home and cause you a great deal of trouble in that way. Nor need you expect to keep him at home when he has reached the age at which it is possible for him to leave, for to him far fields will always look the greenest and the desire to roam is stronger than any other influence in this horoscope. But this is not to be depreciated, for Jupiter, the planet of good fortune and success, is highly elevated in this horoscope and sextile to Venus, which is in the ninth house governing travel. This shows that he will always gain by his changes, and whatever happiness or good fortune there is to be in this life will come through travel and residence in foreign countries. So it would be wrong to try to keep him in the home place.

This horoscope shows two very distinct personalities, as opposite to one another as day is to night. When under the influence of Jupiter, sextile to Venus and Saturn, sextile to Neptune, Albert will be of a highly inspirational nature with a leaning toward the occult and mystical, fond of art and music, with high ideals and ambitions, fond of pleasures and having the ability to win others by his inimitable manner. On the other hand, when he respnds to the aspects of Sun and Neptune square to the Moon, and Mars opposition Jupiter, also Uranus square to Mars, he will show a disregard of all the conventionalities, a lack of restraint, and will then be very prodigal with his money and inclined to gamble. The result will be that he will lose the esteem of his employers and friends, he will find himself without money, and every time that happens he will leave the place where he has disgraced himself and go somewhere else where his better self will soon win him new friends and another start on the upward path.

Such are the tendencies shown in the horoscope, but you, as parents, have a great deal to do with moulding the character of this child. It has come to you for help, and a standard by which it can pattern its life; therefore, you have a great responsibility and you cannot help him to overcome his faults by harsh and strenuous measures. There is only one way left for you, and that is to work on his Jupiter-Venus combination and win him by appeal to his higher self through love; show him by your own example a patient perseverance even when he is ungovernable and defiant, that he may see there is a better way.

The Spirit comes to its parents with all its qualities garnered in former lives, good, bad, and indifferent, as capital to start with. All that the parents do is give it a body and help it until it is capable of governing itself. We certainly do not own our children, nor are we responsible for them any further than to work with them and for them. When Albert has left home in response to the ungovernable wanderlust which possesses him he will often think of you with gratitude if you have helped him and been kind to him. Furthermore, he now gives to you an opportunity for an immense amount of soul-growth, as Christ said that "whatsoever ye have done to one of these little ones, ye have done unto Me." Albert is an Ego that has come to you for help, and he needs more help, forbearance, and patience than most children, for he has an unusually vivid imagination, shown by the Moon, ruling the imagination, in Aires, the sign governing the head, square to Uranus, planet of unconventionality, and Neptune, the planet of psychism and inspiration. He will see things in such an odd and different light that from his standpoint there appears to be no other way of acting than the one he takes and which is contrary to the ordinary conventional method.

With respect to health, we find Saturn and Mars in Taurus indicating throat trouble. Do not allow anyone to operate upon him for tonsillitis. The tonsils are very necessary in the economy of Nature, as we have contended for many years and as medical science is now beginning to find out. Whatever the enlargement, it will subside in due time. The Sun square to the Moon shows that he is not very strong constitutionally and will need all the generous care you can give him. Uranus, the planet of unconventionality, square to the Moon, shows a tendency to trouble arising from illicit intercourse, and he should be taught the proper relationships between the sexes and the sacredness of the generative function. It would also be well to warn him that when he is traveling he is very much more liable to accidents than the general run of people. Fire, lightning, and electricity will also be dangerous for him. However, as said, these are only tendencies shown by the horoscope, and proper care will enable Albert as well as other people to rule the stars and overcome the things which are unfortunate from the ordinary human point of view. From the spiritual point of view there is nothing unfortunate, for all things work together for good in God's kingdom, and what appears as evil is really only good in the making.

### <h3 id="albion-warwick-l">Albion Warwick L. – Born May 4, 1905. 10 a.m., Broetkton, Mass.</h3>

At the time of Albion's birth, we find seven of the nine planets above the horizon and cardinal signs on the angles. This shows that he will lead an active, busy life.

The mental characteristics are indicated by Mercury and the Moon. We find them both highly elevated in the sign Taurus, which tends to gives stability. Mercury is conjoined with Venus. This configuration will give him the ability to express himself in beautiful language, and were it not that these planets are also configured with Saturn by sextile, he would have a fine musical voice and ability as an inspirational instrumental performer. Saturn, however, is the planet of obstruction, and although the configuration is by sextile and therefore good, there may be some drawback in regard to singing-ability. With regard to the mind, Saturn sextile to Mercury has a decidedly beneficial effect, making Albion tactful, systematic, and methodical.

Mercury is also sextile to its higher octave Neptune, and has a weak trine with Uranus, the planet of intuition. This will further strengthen the mind and show Albion to be uncommonly intuitive and inspirational. The conjunction of the Sun, Moon, and Jupiter, and of Mercury and Venus in the sign Taurus, gives a kind, philanthropic disposition and a noble nature which will make Albion very popular and bring him many sincere friends.

The Sun is the ruler of the second house which determines the financial status in life, and we find it in the second sign, Taurus, conjoined with the Moon and Jupiter. This shows excellent prospects for financial comfort during life, and as the sign Taurus and these planets are situated in the eleventh house, which governs friends, hopes, wishes, and aspirations, we may judge that Albion will have many influential friends in high positions who will be interested in him and help him in such a way that he attains prosperity and the accomplishment of his hopes, wishes, and aspirations. Saturn is placed in the twelfth sign Pisces, sextile to Uranus, the planet of intuition, and trine to Neptune, the planet of inspiration. These configurations show a very deep side to Albion's nature. He will at some time take up the study of the occult philosophies and evolve some of his latent faculties by sheer patience and persistence.

With respect to Albion's health, we find that Mars is in the sign Scorpio, which is on the fifth house, the house that rules courtship and the attraction of the sexes before marriage. Mars is in opposition to the Moon and Jupiter. This shows that Albion has a very passionate nature which ought by all means to be curbed or it will cause sorrow, trouble, and disappointment. You should teach him the sacredness of sex and should not mince matters concerning the dreadful consequences of abuse of this holy function.

Having the weak, watery sign Cancer rising, Albion by no means has over-abundant vitality in the first place, though the placement of the Sun, Moon, and Jupiter in the fixed sign Taurus helps a great deal; nevertheless, Albion ought to husband his vitality if he would conserve his health. The digestive functions are not basically strong, for Cancer rules the stomach, and the opposition of Neptune and Uranus shows that a breakdown in health would be accompanied by nervous dyspepsia, which makes life a burden and a misery. Therefore teach him also to be frugal and sparing in his meals and guided by proper judgment in selecting articles of food, otherwise Mars in Scorpio will cause bleeding piles which will add to his misery; he should avoid heating and highly seasoned food, which is irritating to the rectum. Saturn in Pisces gives a tendency to cold feet, but if you keep him warm and teach him to eat properly, these tendencies may not work themselves into effects. Whether these constitutional weaknesses remain latent depends much upon whether the body is abused or taken care of. Albion has a splendid mind, he will see the point and probably may overcome the weaknesses and escape the trouble both morally and phyiscally.

### <h3 id="nicholas-antonio-d">Nicholas Antonio D. — Born June 10, 1908, 8:20 a.m., Villa de Cura, Venezuela.</h3>

At the time of Nicholas' birth, we find Mercury, the planet of reason, conjoined with Venus and Mars, also with Neptune, its higher octave, in the psychic sign Cancer. Uranus, the planet of intuition, is also conjoined with the Moon, which is the planet of imagination. Thus we learn from the horoscope that Nicholas has a bright and fertile mind, a vivid imagination, and good reasoning powers.

We see also that there are four fixed signs on the angles, giving him a very determined disposition, high ideals, and something amounting almost to genius. On the other hand it should not be forgotten that genius is a very extreme condition of sensitiveness, and great care should be taken not to overburden him mentally. He will have very high ideals and considerable musical and artistic ability, which may make quite a name for him, provided he is not overtaxed. In that case he will encounter a great danger of becoming unbalanced, as shown by the fact that the Moon and Uranus are in the sixth house indicating the health, in opposition to the other planets named. Neptune, Mars, Mercury, and Venus, are placed in the twelfth house, which indicates confinement, trouble, and self-undoing.

Thus a great deal will depend upon the training he receives in his home. Parents are too prone to prod their infant prodigies to the maximum exertion, with the inevitable result that they become mentally dulled and are below the ordinary standard in later life. This you should guard against. Do not make over him because of his talents, or show him off to your friends so that you generate in him the inordinate love of applause only too common in those who possess extraordinary gifts. Try to keep his feet on earth, and above everything else do not ever allow him to attend spiritualistic seances where there are negative or mediumistic people through whom he might come in touch with the spirit world. Saturn is square to Neptune in the twelfth house, and the opposition of Neptune from Cancer to Uranus is certain to attract the entities from the invisible world, but only those who are of an undesirable nature. In that case the conjunction of the four planets in the twelfth house may work out in such a manner that Nicholas would become obsessed and unable to free himself from the undesirable spiritual entities that are attracted.

The Sun in Gemini in the eleventh house, the house of friends, hopes, and wishes, shows that he will meet people above him in the social scale who will be able to help him along the path toward a realization of his desires in life. Saturn in trine with Jupiter, the planet of philanthropy and benevolence, shows that he will have a basically kind and philanthropic spirit which will probably lead him into some humanitarian work. This configuration is the saving point in Nicholas' horoscope and will stand him in good stead through every hour of need.

With respect to health, we note that Saturn is square to Neptune in Cancer and Uranus in Capricorn. Cancer rules the stomach and thus we may infer that the digestion will be interfered with unless Nicholas is taught to live the simple life in the home. If he leaves the straight and narrow path of sensible diet he will later on in life experience a great deal of trouble from dyspepsia and rheumatism, particularly in the knees. His circulation is good, as shown by the vital sign Leo rising with Jupiter on the Ascendant, and the Sun unafflicted and elevated in Gemini. If he will only be careful not to abuse his stomach, he will enjoy good health through life.

### <h3 id="carl-r-m">Carl R. M. - Born March 25, 1916, 3:20 p.m., Albany, Oregon.</h3>

Here we have a versatile little youngster with a suave and very pleasing manner, a fine address and the latent ability to express himself well, an interesting conversationalist. These things we learn from the fact that the planets are scattered over three quarters of the horoscope, which imparts versatility, and Venus, the planet of love and harmony, is higly elevated in her own sign Taurus, sextile to Mercury the planet of reason and speech, which is placed in the seventh house in Pisces, the sign where Venus is exalted. This configuration between Mercury and Venus will also give Carl musical ability above the average, which ought to be cultivated as a profession.

The placement of Mercury in the twelfth house sign, Pisces, and sextile to Venus, however, shows that Carl tends to be mentally lazy and very fond of pleasure. You will find it very difficult, if not impossible, to get him to study any subject that requires brain work, and the Moon placed in Sagittarius and in the fourth house, indicating the home, shows that he will be very restless and desirous of getting out in society, among friends, and in an artistic environment.

Unfortunately, his friends will be a detriment to him, for we find Saturn, the planet of treachery, in the eleventh house which rules friends, hopes, and wishes, square to Jupiter and the Sun, which are placed in the eighth house ruling legacies. This shows that Carl will receive a legacy sometime in life but that he is likely to lose it through the underhanded treachery of supposed friends. He should, therefore, be warned that everybody who speaks fair is not to be trusted. It is particularly those who are older than himself who are to be guarded against in this connection, for Saturn always signifies an older person. It may also be said, however, that Carl will never want money, for the ruler of his second house (occupied principally by Libra) is Venus, and she is exalted, essentially dignified, and highly elevated, as well as. sex tile to Mercury, his ruler. So he will always have plenty for the day and the way.

The configuration between Saturn in Cancer with the Sun and Jupiter in Aries also affects the health. Cancer rules the stomach, Jupiter the arterial circulation, and the Sun the vitality. Venus in Taurus, ruling the palate, will make Carl very fond of fine food, but Saturn in Cancer shows that there will be digestive trouble on that account, a corruption of the blood and lowering of the vitality, if these tastes are indulged. The utmost care should be taken to show him that the simple life must be lived if health is to be maintained. There is also another thing, the very worst in this whole horoscope, and requires a great deal of help from parents. Venus is square to Uranus, the latter planet placed in the sixth house indictating disease. This shows that Carl will have a very amorous nature and be apt from earliest youth to indulge it regardless of the conventions; he is also likely through this excess to contract disease of the most dangerous nature. It is the duty of the parents to instruct him very carefully as soon as he can possibly grasp the idea in matters regarding sex and sex hygiene. He needs very careful watching to save him from the unfortunate consequence of such abuses.

### <h3 id="homer-h-m">Homer H. M. - Born March 5, 1915 at 12:20 a.m., San Diego, California.</h3>

This is an attractive little fellow, for his life-ruler, Jupiter, the planet of philanthropy and benevolence, is conjoined with the Sun and trine to the Moon, giving him an unusual magnetism and an expansive, jovial nature. He also has a splendid mentality, for we find Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, conjoined with Mercury, the planet of reason, in the intellectual sign Aquarius, and these are placed in the third house which denotes the mind, also trine to Saturn in the mercurial sign Gemini. This shows that Homer is very quick to grasp a point, smart and resourceful in overcoming difficulties, enterprising and energetic in carrying out whatever project he has in mind. The saturnine trine gives him an unusual ability to think profoundly and concentrate with ease upon whatever problem confronts him, and see through even the most abstruse proposition.

These qualities will naturally make him very successful in life. He will not be a follower by any means, but a leader. We always find that whenever there are four common signs on the angles, as in this case, the person prefers not to work with his hands, and Saturn in Gemini, which rules these members, shows that Homer has the same disposition. To offset this, though, he has the genius wherewith to direct the labors of others so as to make a mark for himself in the doing of the world's work. Uranus is also in the sign Aquarius, and this third house configuration shows that he will take up some inventive vocation of an unusual nature, probably electricity, navigation of the air, or maybe some things which we are not even dreaming of at the present time.

But Homer is not without faults either, and this is where the parents must come in and help him, not alone to cultivate the talents which he possesses, but also to overcome, or rather, to prevent the faults which are latent from coming to an expression. In this horoscope we find the planet Neptune in Cancer, a watery sign, indicating fluids. It is in opposition to Venus, the planet of love, placed in the second house which rules finances, and both of these planets are square to the Moon which is placed in Scorpio, ruling the generative organs. This shows that Homer will be very fond of wine, women, and song, that he will spend his money lavishly in gratification of these desires, and that he will meet the usual reward which comes with such indulgence. It is the duty of the parents to educate him to the fact that such a course of life will eventually bring sorrow and suffering, cloud the mind and impair the health.

This child has exceptionally good vitality, for Jupiter, his life ruler, is conjoined with the Sun, the giver of life, trine to the Moon. It will take a great deal to break down such a constitution, but it may be done, and we therefore trust you will use all your good offices in warning him and educating him to live the right life.

Saturn, the planet of obstruction, is located in Gemini, which rules the lungs; it is unafflicted and even well-aspected, and therefore we may conclude that he will not have any serious trouble from this source. It has been noticed, however, that wherever Saturn is placed there is always a weak spot, so it will be well for you to guard him particularly during the days of childhood. If he does contract a cold do not allow it to hang on without taking proper steps to eradicate it.

On the whole we may say that this is a very fortunate horoscope and the parents are certainly to be congratulated in having attracted such a fine Spirit to their home.

### <h3 id="virginia-h">Virginia H. - Born January 17, 1912, 1:57 a.m., Seattle, Washington.</h3>

At the time of Virginia's birth, Mercury and the Moon, which are significators of the mind, were in conjunction in the saturnine sign Capricorn. The Sun also was in conjunction with Uranus, the planet of intuition, trine to Mars, the planet of dynamic energy. Thus it is seen that Virginia will have a quick, active, and intuitive mind of a very resourceful nature, which will enable her to grasp anything she desires to understand and to cope with all the problems and difficulties in life. The saturnine influence of the sign Capricorn, where these planets are located, will give her quite a deep insight, and thus she has one of the greatest fortunes to be found, something that no one can deprive her of and which will stand her in good stead all through her existence—a good mind. It is said that it is better to be born lucky than rich, because one may lose riches that are inherited, but if one has luck, then riches will come and all good things in life. This we may modify to fit this child's case and say that it is better to be born with a good mind than a large fortune, for having that, all other good things are more apt to come to her.

But, Virginia is not neglected at all in the matter of fortune, either, for Jupiter, the great benefic planet of benevolence, and Venus, the planet of love, beauty, and harmony, are in the second house, Jupiter being essentially dignified. This shows that she is going to have a good share of the world's wealth, sufficient to give her a comfortable income all through life, and she will probably have many friends who will help her in that respect and make life pleasant for her. Seeing that these configurations occur mostly in the second house, and that the Sun, which is the significator of marriage for women, is trine to Mars, the planet situated in the seventh house, which governs marriage, it is safe to say that Virginia will be very benefitted by marriage—that she will marry an energetic, ambitions man who will furnish the wherewithal to carry out her designs and ambitions.

The ninth house is the house of dreams, visions, and fancies, and we find in Virginia's horoscope that Neptune is there in the psychic sign Cancer. This will give her very vivid dreams and imagination, but on account of the opposition of the Sun and Uranus these are apt to be of an undesirable, weird, and horrible nature. This configuration also tends to make her mediumistic and an easy prey to spirit controls. You should therefore guard her against any possible contact with such undesirable entities. Do not take her to spiritualistic seances or allow anyone who is of a negative, mediumistic nature to be much in her company. The dreams and visions may perhaps also be discouraged if you will be careful that she eats only a light meal in the evening, and that quite a long while before she goes to bed. This configuration of the Sun, Uranus, and Neptune from the third and ninth houses also has an influence on traveling. It makes her liable to accidents and, knowing this, you can perhaps help her by teaching her to be very careful in getting on and alighting from conveyances when she comes to the age where she will be out by herself. While she is under your care you can, of course, look after her.

With respect to health, we find Saturn and Mars in the sign which governs the neck and throat. This shows that there may be trouble in that region, and particularly that she will be susceptible to colds and inflammations. On that account do not wrap her up, but rather strive to inure that throat to cold by discriminate exposure. Her vital powers are good, however, on account of the trine of the Sun, which is the giver of life, to Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, and anything that may happen to her will only be of a passing nature; her recuperative powers will very soon assert themselves and dispel the cloud of sickness. With four fixed signs on the angles and Saturn and Mars in the fixed sign Taurus, the prinicpal fault is that of being set and stubborn and determined to have her own will, but you still have several years of the flexible infant stage in which to teach her adaptability. If you can do this it will benefit her much in later life.

### <h3 id="richard-l">Richard L. - Born February 20, 1916, 4:20 a.m., Seattle, Washington.</h3>

At the time of Richard's birth, Mercury, the planet of reason, and Uranus, planet of intuition, were rising in the first house, which governs the personal characteristics. This gives him a very high-strung, nervous temperament along with an ingenious, original, and intuitive mind, and he would be all right if he would only listen to that inner voice and obey it unquestioningly. But, unfortunately, we find the Sun opposite the Moon. This adds to his ambitious nature, but makes him hesitate and vacillate, particularly as the lights are in common signs. Thus whenever a course of action is to be decided upon, he will not be equal to making the decision, but will be torn between two desires, hesitating and fearful to make a choice. This is a serious handicap as regards success in life, and we would urge you by all means to begin right away to teach him to make a decision in the little things that now call for action in his life. Then he may acquire the virtue of stability and not be like a reed tossed hither and thither by the winds of indecision when everything may depend upon prompt action in one of the crises of life.

There is also shown the possibility of financial loss and poverty, unless this tendency can be corrected. If you can put sufficient backbone in him, the sextile of Mercury and the trine of Neptune to the planet of opulence, Jupiter, which is placed in the second house governing finance, may over-rule the opposition of the Sun and Moon, and give a comfortable income through life.

Saturn, the planet of obstruction, square to Venus, the planet of love, shows that Richard will meet with trouble and disappointment in courtship, and the position of Saturn, Neptune, and Mars in the seventh house governing marriage shows that this state is not going to be one of pleasure for him, but is bound to bring sorrow, trouble, and disappointment. It will therefore be better if you can make him understand that it will not be advantageous for him to enter into it. All these things do not sound very encouraging for Richad, but remember that the horoscope shows only tendencies, and that we are aiming to help by showing where trouble may lie.

But there are also favorable things in Richard's horoscope. The Sun, which is the giver of life, is trine to Saturn. This brings out all the saturnine virtues and gives them to Richard so that he will have a systematic conservative, diplomatic disposition, likely to make a great many friends for him who will help him much. This aspect occurs from the seventh house, so it is probable that he wil" take part in local municipal affairs and win much honor and friendship thereby, becoming a highly valued member of the community. It is only in his own inner nature that the indecision is felt and particularly regarding his own affairs. Thus, his life from his standpoint and to the general outward appearance may be very happy in another way than the conventional life usually lived by people who marry and devote themselves to their families alone.

With respect to health, we find that Saturn is in Cancer, the sign which rules the stomach, and square to Venus in Aires, the sign which rules the head. This shows that there will be poor circulation of blood in that part of the body, with the result that he will be likely to suffer from headaches, and that the basic cause of headaches and poor circulation will be a wrong diet. We are, therefore, glad to have his horoscope so early in life, for during the first seven years the greatest number of habits are formed. Now, if you will be very careful with his diet and teach him to eat carefully, for the sake of nourishment, instead of to please his palate, you may help him to overcome this difficulty.

### <h3 id="edmond-a-w">Edmond A. W. — Born December 13, 1911, 9:15 p.m., Los Angeles, California.</h3>

At the time of Edmond's birth, four fixed signs were on the angles, with Leo on the Ascendant, showing him to be very strong-willed and determined. There is in the Leo at times a cruel strain, but usually they are extremely soft-hearted and kind, particularly to the family and those they love. Where they love they love dearly, but they can also hate.

We find Mercury, the planet of reason, in the saturnine sign Capricorn, trine to Saturn, which is in Taurus in the tenth house. As we have often said, Saturn in a good aspect to Mercury is one of the most benefic configuration with respect to the mental qualities, for Saturn obstructing the flighty mind gives ability to concentrate and apply oneself to the deeper and more profound problems of life; it brings out in the person the best of the saturnine virtues: system, method, order, memory, tact diplomacy, and love of justice, so that Edmond is particularly fortunate in having this configuration. As Saturn is in Taurus, it may give him a little hesitancy in speech, and debar him from giving fluent expression to his ideas, but they will be of such depth and value that every word he will utter counts.

We also find Uranus, the planet of intuition, trine to Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, placed in the tenth house, which denotes the social standing. This shows that Edmond will have an intuitive grasp of things far beyond the power of reason. He will be of a very original turn of mind, and possess talents that will bring him before the public. He will be very ambitious, but there is only one thing to be guarded against; if he allows himself to be carried away by an inordinate desire for publicity, this may bring about his downfall. Saturn and Mars in the tenth house are always dangerous in that respect. They give the person the ambition to rise and the inherent power to do so, but they also usually bring about a fall. However, in the case of Edmond we find no bad aspects of either Saturn or Mars. On the contrary, they are extremely well aspected and therefore let us hope that this will not apply in this case. It will do no harm for you, however, to sound the voice of warning from time to time so that he may not become too egotistical with success.

The Moon is square to Mercury; this operates upon the mind in such a manner that under certain planetary conditions Edmond will be subject to worry and indecision, also a lack of continuity and mental stability, but the other mercurial aspects are so good that this needs scarcely to be taken into consideration. It will be only a very passing phase of his consciousness. Mercury is also sextile to Venus, and this of itself will give a cheerful nature that will dispel any gloom that may gather Uranus is close to the cusp of Aquarius where it is particularly strong, and it is sextile to Jupiter, the planet of optimism and benevolence. Jupiter is also strong in Sagittarius, and therefore this configuration makes for general success in connection with the houses where they are placed; the third and sixth. This shows that Edmond is likely to benefit by a legacy and that he will have general success through life in financial matters. His occupation is also shown to be something connected with sixth house matters, as a doctor or surgeon or in charge of some institution where the sick are cared for or in chemical laboratory work. Of these occupations, the Uranus-Mars configuration seems to favor the vocation of surgeon.

With respect to health we find that Edmond is very well fixed. The strong sign Leo rising, with Mars, the planet of dynamic energy, highly elevated and well-aspected, and the Sun in the fiery sign Sagittarius, gives good vitality and shows that he will readily recuperate if anything happens to disturb his health. But Saturn in Taurus shows that the throat is the weakest point in his anatomy, and it will be well for you to guard him against colds. Not, however, by muffling him up, but by strengthening him so that he will not feel the changes of weather.

With Neptune in the twelfth house of sorrow, trouble, and self-undoing, in opposition to Uranus in the sixth house, it would be dangerous for him to enter spiritualistic circles, for he might be seized upon by the visiting spirits, who would probably find him an easy victim.