---
title: "Studies in Astrology - Volume IX"
language: 'en'
original_title: "Studies in Astrology - Volume IX"
original_language: 'en'
author: 'Elman Bacher'
original_source_file: 'self'
---

<h1 id="studies-in-astrology-volume-9">Studies in Astrology - Volume IX</h1>

by Elman Bacher

Second Printing

### <h3 id="table-of-contents">Table of Contents</h3>

- [Chapter 1: Complementation](#chapter-1)
- [Chapter 2: Security](#chapter-2)
- [Chapter 3: Diameter, Quadrant, and Decanate](#chapter-4)
- [Chapter 4: Light (Part 1)](#chapter-4)
- [Chapter 5: Light (Part 2)](#chapter-5)
- [Chapter 6: Light as Therapy](#chapter-6)
- [Chapter 7: Light as Communication](#chapter-7)
- [Chapter 8: Light as Affluence](#chapter-8)
- [Chapter 9: Hospital Experience](#chapter-9)
- [Chapter 10: The Astrological Path](#chapter-10)

Chapter I
Complementation

"Complementation" is the most important single word in the study of human relationships because it is a word-symbol of the archetype of the vibratory exchanges that make relationship what it is. Its life is polarity; its two basic macrocosms are masculine and feminine. All basic human relationship patterns (marital, fraternal, parent-child, etc.) represent a specifie pattern of complementation in action as "ignitions" of human vibratory consciousness.

The person whose vibratory qualities do not contain anything that we respond to, in our subconscious feelings, is the person to whom we are indifferent; in such casual contacts we meet such a persononly in the dimension of time-space. The absence of mutual vibratory ignition takes everything from the contact that could result in relationship. Ignition byone person on the vibratory body of another causes the person who is "ignited" to react with subconscious feeling; he, by his reactions, subconsciously identifies the contact by some sort of relationship-word. Lacking mutuality, the "relationship-quality" exists only in his own feeling.

However, when we meditate on the subject of our subconscious reaction-faculty, we recognize a remarkable thing: we, as "reacting mechanisms," do react to some degree to almost every other human being. Walking down a busy city-street, we pass, and are passed by, innumerable people; unless we are intensely preoccupied with some focused mental picture, we fleetingly react to impressions of faces, features, bodies, clothes, walks, deformities, beauties, and actions of others; even a deep preoccupation can be jolted when we come into the vibratory field of someone who coincides with one of our inner relationship pictures in a marked way--our attention "snaps into awareness" of such a person and we experience a feeling- reaction. That feeling-reaction is relationship-awareness because one of our subconscious relationship-pictures has been, for a momentat least, "ignited." That person--an otherwise perfect stranger whom we may never see again--is an outpicturing of a facet of our subconscious relationship-resource, and as such is related to us in a vibratory way. This "relationship" will be pleasant or otherwise depending on the basic quality of our "inner picture."

We become so accustomed to our basic relationship-patterns that we seldom recognize their true source or quality. We just react and react and react. The Art of Human Relationship--the greatest of all arts--is the harmonization of our reactions toward people so that we bring ourselves into a clearer and clearer perception of the ideal which is the archetype of each person. It is truth that the reality of any person--to you, at any point in your evolutionary timing--is the quality of your reaction to the person; change your reaction and you change the quality of the relationship, for better or for worse.

This is not just a theory; prove it for yourselfby mentally rehearsing your own changes of reaction-quality toward people who have figured in a significant way in your experience during this incarnation. Did you ever love someone deeply and then find your reaction changing into a feeling of dislike or aversion? Did you ever fear someone and then, with clarified understanding, come to regard him as a valued friend? Have you ever experienced a congestion-disintegration by becoming more appreciative and loving toward one of your parents? or toward a brother or sister? Did you ever hate someone so deeply that you felt a desire to destroy him or to hurt him in some drastic way and then experience so marked a change of heart (significant phrase!) thatyou "came into" a feeling of deep respect and admiration? Were you ever apparently quite indifferent to someone who figured in your experience for a long time and then underwent such a change of feeling that you fell in love and married the person? All of these types of inner changes represent the realities of relationship-transformation by "modulation into different octaves and keys "--and into different patterns. Love-Wisdom nurtures the archetype reality of all relationships between people.

In this discussion of "complementation" we are not concerned with the houses of the horoscope, primarily; the houses are the spatial (physical) description of experiences and relationships. We are concerned with the vibratory qualities, generic qualities, focalization of generic qualities by the planets and the generic patterns represented by the planetaryaspects. Try an elasticization to prepare your mind for this study: make a copy of your natal chart without the house-cusps; simply place the planets in their (relatively) accurate positions in the wheel by sign and degree-position. This is so you can keep in mind the aspects made by your planets to each other.) Now make a list of the planetary rulerships of the twelve signs; suggest: Mars for Aries, Venus for Taurus-Libra, Mercury for Gemini-Virgo, Moon for Cancer, Sun for Leo, Pluto for Scorpio, Jupiter for Sagittarius, Saturn for Capricorn, Uranus for Aquarius, and Neptune for Pisces. Learn this listing so that you are perfectly familiar with it. It is the planetary rulership of the zodiac. Also learn the planetary dispositorship of the zodiac: all planets in Aries are disposited by Mars, all in Taurus-Libra are disposited by Venus, all in Gemini-Virgo are disposited by Mercury, all in Cancer are disposited by the Moon, etc. In other words, planets in a given sign are disposited by the ruler of that sign; the planetary ruler of a given sign disposits all planets in that sign. Acquire fluency on these points.

Now, for further clarification, enclose by a circle all planets in each particular sign in the "cuspless" wheel you've made. This gives your eye a chance to group your planets by sign-position, regardless of their house-position; list your planets by sign-position and bracket each group by the planetary dispositor; this listing is the vibratory grouping of your horoscope--you should learn it thoroughly. Now, in the cuspless wheel, draw a diameter: the starting-point will be the planetary ruler of your natal horoscope; the sign which contains the opposite point is your complementation sign; its ruler (whatever planet it is) focalizes that vibration and thus is your essential complementary vibration. Thus we see that the dispositor of your Ascendant-ruler and the ruler of the sign opposite to the one which contains your Ascendant ruler are the two basic points of your complementation patterns in this incarnation. The sign which contains your "complement planet" and its ruler will be the chief qualifying vibration of your complement. Study your Ascendant-ruler-dispositor and its planetary complement from every conceivable standpoint; in them is found the inner secrets of your relationship-consciousnessin this incarnation; they represent the focalized vibrations or inner picture of "yourself " and the inner picture of your "other self."

Now to create the first of your two "generic charts." This one is derived directly from your natal Ascendant. Make a copy of your natal horoscope, correct in every detail, using, as Ascendant, the cusp carrying the sign which contains your Ascendant-ruler; do not change anything in the wheel. The sign that now appears as Ascendant (containing, either in twelfth or first house, your natal ruler) is your vibratory Ascendant. The planet that rules this sign is your vibratory ruler and its position by sign, elemental trine (fire, earth, air, water), structural cross (cardinal, fixed, mutable), and planetary aspects gives the picture of your inner recognition of yourself; your natal ruler is the "outward" of you-how you think of yourself consciously and how you most directly appear to other people. Remember that the ruler of your natal Ascendant is projected into the wheel from the Ascendant and by its house-position it indicates your self- recognitions in terms of space/time and activity. The vibratory ruler, however, is projected from the sign that it rules andits relationship to the body of the wheel is in terms of extension from its own sign of dignity. If the vibratory ruler is in the same element as is the sign it rules (the vibratory Ascendant-sign) then it isthe Power or Love or Wisdom expression of your inner nature which is focalized to indicate your basic spiritual power. If the vibratory ruler is in a sign which refers to the same structural cross pertaining to the sign it rules, then it is "square" or "opposition "its sign of dignity and this represents an evolutionary turning point--analogous to the "turning points" of the cardinal, fixed, and mutable squares (or "crosses") of the Great (or Abstract) Mandala.

Your chart, as it now stands (with the vibratoryAscendant) is the basic generic variation of your natal chart. The generic quality of the vibratory ruler, the sign it's in, and the quality of its dispositor will serve to identify the basic generic quality of your natal chart, since this variation is derived from the sign-position of the ruler of the natal Ascendant. Synthesize carefully by reference to generic spectrum and remember that this variation is not a picture of your Being as "male" or "female;" it is the basic masculinity or basic femininity of your inner nature. Since this variation is derived directly from the natal horoscope, consider this thought: What house, in your natal chart, contains your vibratory ruler? This house, whatever it is, will picture the physical, or "space-time" focus of this particular vibratory flowering. In other words, the "where-and-when in your incarnation you will find perfection of this basic inner quality of your nature." What does your chart show concerning this?

If you are at all philosophically or psychologically inclined (and of course you are or you wouldn't be reading this), you will recognize that you and only you are the determining factor of your relationship-experiences. Philosophers do not, as a rule, plough blindly through their incarnations making the same old mistakes in the same old way, over and over; they seek enlightenment toward improving their inner conditions and thereby learn how to improve the quality of their expressions. Philosophers do not spend their time in blame or accusation of others because they know that it is not people but their own negative reactions which cause their pain. So now, as philosophers, we will enjoy a study of the basic generic chart as it serves to picture the "inner" of our relationship- consciousness. Another variation.

From the chart as it now appears as "basic generic," turn it (or make another copy) so that the sign opposite to the one containing the natal ruler appears as the Ascendant. This is--or we shall call it--your "complementation Ascendant;" its planetary ruler is your "complementation ruler."

Now this planet, whatever it is, is the distillation of your complementary relationship-consciousness--way down deep. It is the essential vibratory portrait of your "other self " and, inversely, it is the portrait of the enemy you carry around inside of yourself; this "enmity" is, of course, qualified by the regenerate aspects made by this planet, but its congestions (squares and oppositions) are, in the opinion of the author, more important to understand than any other factor of your astrological make-up because each one of these congestions is the "mote in your own eye" by which you see evil in another.

Each congestion to this complementation-ruler represents, actually, a deep, dark ignorance of a specific Life-principle. Stimulations of these congestions will cause "other people to hurt you the most intensely "--your reactions to them, by this stimulation, at different timings, is what you feel when Life, in her Wisdom, uses a knife to do a little surgery on your congested, crystallized inner conditions. As long as you live these patterns reactively you will suffer through your reactions to the persons represented by the aspects; but when you enlighten your consciousness as to the nature of the principle represented by this particular planet you will recognize that you must consciously align yourself to make this principle a constructive expression in your life; to the degree that you do this, you will "take hands with the enemy inside and make him your friend." The Great Teacher said: "Resist not evil;" did He mean: "I get up on this fretting and stewing about what other people do--spend your time in straightening your own consciousness and live accordingly?" It is suggested--because this particular point is of urgent importance--that you make as detailed a study of this "complement-ruler" as you can. Study its placement and meaning in relationship to the Great Mandala; study its generic meaning, its relationship meaning. What does it represent as a spiritual principle and, from a karmic standpoint? What did you do in the past to create the present congested aspects? How many people (whose charts you have) have "points" that synchronize with this planet in your pattern? What has been their influence and effect on you and your life? What has been your influence on them, please? Do you tend to blame them for "doing things to you" and then turn right around and do those same things to others? It is felt that in no other astrological factor does the student need to get his thoughts, feelings, and reactions out in the open, honestly and squarely, than in those matters pertaining to this particular planet.

Charts, of course, vary considerably as far as vibrational quality is concerned. Perhaps this "complementation ruler " in your chart has no congestions--just sextiles and trines; then it is suggested that you compare this planet with your "vibrational ruler." Which one gives you the most "advantage," which one represents the free-est expression of Power as Love-Wisdom, which one acts most effectively as a "decrystallizer of congestions," which one represents a principle that you are the most clearly aware of in your conscious being, which one represents the more clearly an ideal that you see outpictured in others, or an ideal that you, yourself, outpicture toothers? There are many questions you can ask of your Higher Self pertaining to these things but they must be asked honestly--excuses, self- justifications, and blamings have no place in this kind of analysis. The "complementation ruler" can, of course be studied from an additional factor: the quality of the planet that disposits it--that planet might be very congested even if the complementation ruler itself is not; if such is the case, then learn from your relationships (the good outpicturing of other people) how to deal with that particular congestion. You will see something wonderful in other people that you wish you had yourself; try to determine what this principle is and put it to work in your daily living. This is what "life-learning" really means.

So now we have the natal horoscope and its two basic generic variations. (Suggest complete copies of all three for reference). The cardinal signs focalize the vibratory relationship-structure, and this focalization is represented by the sign-positions and aspects of the structural planets: Mars, Moon, Venus, and Saturn. The generic grouping of the planets will serve to determine which of the two "variations" is the "masculine generic chart" and which is the "feminine generic chart" and from this synthesis you can determine the generic qualitv of your basic relationship-patterns. Which relationships focalize your masculine expressions and which focalize your feminine expressions; which focalize your reaction-patterns; what kind of relationship-pattern serves to bring to you your most needed spiritual lessons; towhich one--or two--do you naturally contribute your best in love and wisdom?

One comes into a realization of astrological values through much study, meditation, observation, and experience; it is impossible for all these subtle factors to be "put in words" at a single sitting. But when a student of astrology is also a philosopher who keeps his mind open to new octaves of realization he "ignites" his Inner Wisdom bit by bit until deep levels of realization are lifted to the surface of consciousness for practical application. We have come into awareness that it is useless to center our attention on people as being only "male and female"-- the "repolarization process" has been in effect for too long a time to make this approach essentially valid. We are realizing that the truth of human relationships is cosmic polarity. Masculinity and femininity--"expression and reflection"--are expressed by all people, regardless of their physical bodies and their generative purposes and capacities.

So, in more clearly alerting ourselves to the symbolic values of Mars, Moon, Venus, Saturn, and the other planetary bodies that focalize the generic value of the zodiacal signs, we see in every horoscope the manhood/womanhood of every human being. We must learn--it is our principal purpose here--the ways to express and reflect the Generic Principles of Life; our "school" is Humanity; our "classrooms" are the sum- total of all of our relationship-experiences, as male and female, in all of our incarnations. Nothing less than this could provide pabulum for complete realization of the human ideal. 



Studies in Astrology
by
Elman Bacher

Volume IX
Chapter II
Security

"To exist" is "to be in a state of motion," but "to live constructively" is "to exist with a consciousness of source and objective." In this consciousness is found the root of the security-feeling regardless of the condition of outer circumstances. The astrological mandala pictures this as follows: Draw a circle with the vertical and horizontal diameters; place the Aries-symbol at the Ascendant-point Capricorn at the top of the wheel, Cancer at the bottom; connect Aries to Capricorn and Cancer by straight lines.

Aries is the primordial I AM--the consciousness of individualized self-hood. Because Life is Action, "to be" means "to express," "to project" and "to act and react." Creativity and epigenesis are, depending on evolutionary octave, the arch-principles of Life-action because all expressions are radiative and affective by nature. Mars then is the Principle of Action, the "Spark from the Central Flame" which provides every epigenetic thing with the faculty of projective movement. But, Mars has to have an objective toward which to move, else his action is devoid of purpose or meaning. His unfocused actions are, therefore, wasted energy. To waste one's endowment of energy is to deplete the consciousness of I AM; the result of this depletion is one polarity of the insecurity-feeling.

To have a relatively dim awareness of I AM is to be relatively decentralized and, correspondingly, relatively susceptible to the impacts of other mental, emotional, psychic, and physical power- projections. Remember that in target-practice the shooting and the throwing have no meaning if there is no target to focus on for training; the target chemically symbolizes the objective of developing physical co-ordination for which the shooter or thrower practices. To continue to shoot or throw without the focus of the target is "Mars without an objective;" such action results in a bare minimum of muscular exercise but little, if any, muscular co-ordination results.

We speak of growing boys and girls as "shooting up to young manhood and womanhood." When the objectives of life-giving maturities are not focused on, then the mechanical growing up-like the aimless shooting and throwing-eventually results in the insecurity of wasted motion and energy. To "take incarnation" has for its purpose life-givingness which is maturity and which, astrologically, is indicated by the exaltation of Mars in Capricorn, the Saturn-sign of power to assume and fulfill responsibilities. These responsibilities are inherent in the fact that maturity of consciousness implies self-direction and the spiritual responsibility is constructive expression. On the genetic octave of expression, "constructive expression" is generative life and steward-ship of that which is generated, whether it is the incarnation of other Egos--"our children"--or the initiation of a work- pattern--"our service."

Wasted growing-up-ness is, to a large degree, a mechanical action which results in insecurity when the person is timed for mature expression but is incapable of such functioning. He is at the mercy of other people's vibrations and powers and he is incapable of functioning from his center of self-direction. Mars, leaving Aries and traveling through the wheel counter-clockwise, must rise from the Cancer-point at the bottom of the wheel; to remain bogged down in dependency-security is to avoid the dynamic upward propulsion of true growing. Any person so bogged down tries to function through another strength, he does not "know his own." He remains fixated on "source," but since he is unaware of individualized objectives, he cannot help but fail to realize the ideal of true security.

Since that which is growing needs protection and sustainment, true dependency-security is the fulfillment of legitimate needs. The fetus needs the maternal substance, the baby and growing child need food, shelter, guidance, and love; the student needs education, the worker needs a service-objective and income. All people who are evolving need the security- sense of specific identities--family affiliation, religious affiliation, national affiliation, and racial affiliation--until such time as the truth of selfhood is realized. Congestions in dependency-security result in psychological and sexual subnormality, crystallization in opinion, prejudice, intolerance, fixation on chemical expressions as symbols of security, racial and nationalistic fears and enmities and, above all, the inability to adjust to needed changes for development and elasticization of consciousness.

A person "arrives" at a specific point in his evolution; when he identifies that point as "a reality" he remains, in a sense, static for a time to fulfill the requirements of that point. If he then fails to adjust to needed changes--remains fixated on that with which he has become familiar--he "dies inside" because his consciousness of himself will not permit the evolutionary forces of life to express through him. And that "point" can be one of innumerable things with which humans identify themselves during the sequence of their incarnations.

The sign Cancer in the Great Mandala is the "nest- symbol" to the dependent person. Exoterically it is "chemicalized source"-- womb, mother, home, nation, and race. Esoterically it is his own psychological base--the things he rests on inside himself as a consciousness of resource to express for his individualized need for greater fulfillment. The psychological base is never dependent on the chemical expressions of life; once established the person rests on it and in it wherever he goes during his incarnation. This inner establishment makes it possible for him to adjust to any and all outer changes of circumstances; herein is seen a picturing of the Moon--ruler of Cancer--being exalted in its own eleventh house-sign, Taurus. Taurus corresponds to Cancer as Uranus-ruled Aquarius corresponds to Aries-- the eleventh house-sign pattern is liberation and impersonalization.

The disorganized person--the vagrant, the outlaw, and the insane--is such because he has lost his sense of contact with identity and inner focus. The vagrant has experience, certainly, but it is in the nature of an aimless movement through life; the outlaw has lost his sense of belongingness with other people--he is in a continual state of protest against something in himself (something of the vibratory source of the present incarnation ) that he has not understood or clearly perceived. In other words, there is no connection, in the minds of such people, between what they were in the past, what they should be now, and what they might become in the future. Their forgotten past and unpictured future suspends them in the aimless present.

The person we designate as "miser" is one of the most insecure because he is not aware of the source of his over-attachment to chemicality--money--as a symbol of security. His greed and unceasing grasping outpictures his crumbled inner foundation--he seeks security in "possessing" something whose essential identity is "medium of exchange as an expression of feeling about other people."

Over-attachment to a loved one is also an outpicturing of negative dependency-security because the suffering person identifies another human as his psychological base. Devoted and faithful love is not, in itself, a "mechanism of congestion;" it is an expression of the human heart's highest octave. But the kind of love that cannot live independently of chemical nearness is truly not love but a symbol of inner insecurity; anyone who identifies another as "security" is off his own inner base--he is continually afflicted with anxieties, apprehensions, and tensions. The person, having "displaced" himself, says that he is anxious about the well-being of the loved one but it is his own security that he is really anxious about. True loving is health-giving, faith-strengthening, confidence- inspiring; the "loving" that is a fearful, tense dependency is just the opposite.

So we see that over-dependency on externals is the arch-root of insecurity. The correction is found in understanding what the external symbolizes and then establishing the reality of that symbol in consciousness and expressing from that psychological base; such expression is self-generating and self-directing; it is symbolized by the line drawn from Cancer upward to Capricorn in the Great Mandala. This is the picture of the dependent, immature person transmuting his consciousness with experience to attain the status of a mature, independent individual. "We recognize, because polarity is inter-active and retro-active, that the Cancer-Capricorn diameter pictures the present insecurities having resulted from past unfulfillments and present securities having resulted from past fulfillments. That which is now established as sound, integrated psychological base-power is pabulum for exercise of responsibility-fulfillments. To be free of dependency on externals qualifies for self-directing, efficient dynamic functioning. Many people assume responsibilities--parenthood, work, etc.--but their crumbled psychological base, with resultant dependency on externals as securities, disqualifies them from successfully and completely fulfilling that which they have assumed.

For example--and there are many such to be studied in these times--a man assumes the responsibility of governmental work; he is insecure by reason of his over-dependency on money as a symbol of security; he traduces the principles inherent in the responsibilities of his job; he "works the angles of expediency" but he breaks faith in order to realize his illusionary security-symbol; in his next incarnation--or in some future incarnation--his faith in other people will be shattered by their falseness and lack of principle; they will simply outpicture his own intensified insecurity, the result of his previous (present) spiritual immaturity. This is an important point to consider: to adhere to the principles of a work-pattern or a relationship-pattern insures the maximum efficiency of responsibility-fulfillment and, correspondingly, a maximum efficiency of maturing the psychological base to carry over as "strength- pabulum" into the next incarnation. The accumulations of strength-pabulum total to the accumulation of relative Masterhood; the depletion of strength- pabulum is recession from realizing Ideality.

The person who assumes a pattern of responsibility and who betrays that pattern by inner darkness and lack of principle disintegrates his own psychological base to a degree. He disqualifies for further power-expression until he has reclaimed his consciousness, faces and passes the testings which Life (his own consciousness) brings to him in order to prove his worth. When you as an astro-philosopher, study charts to analyze the sources of another's problems and you recognize that his suffering has been directly due to his over- dependency on externals, then know that, somewhere in his past, he disqualified and his disqualifications have been outpictured this time by his dependency-reaction on the weaknesses of others. He will tell you that his parents never gave him enough, he never got any breaks, his boss never appreciates him, he has been continually taken advantage of and cheated, he is always involved in automobile accidents, his children are always sick, he was divorced three times, betrayed by the woman he loved, etc. Such tales outpicture terrifically deep insecurities, the direct result of betrayal of responsibility-fulfillments in the past. Now, such a person doesn't know just who he is or what he is here for; his motivations are only dimly perceived; he is unaware of his power-resources (strength-pabulum); and his consciousness of experience-principles is hazy at best. He has to learn anew what his identity is and what it means to understand experience-principles and the spiritual methods for expressing according to Principle.

Now--a case very much in point these days-- international security.

This term is a composite of the security- consciousness of every human now incarnate. In these later days we have come into a clearer recognition of "One World" than ever before in our history. To recognize "One World" is to assume the responsibility of living accordingly. To not recognize--or not be able to recognize--"One World" simply outpictures adherence to separative nationalistic concepts; nationalistically-minded people cannot be expected to"think internationally" any more than a small child should be expected to love other children's mothers and fathers more than he does his own. But--and this is very significant--there are many now incarnate who profess the "One World Consciousness" but who violate it continually. Which brings us to the subject of "Americanism:"

To incarnate as a citizen of the United States of America is to assume the responsibility of living the "One World Consciousness." You and I and every other American citizen qualified for incarnation here, and we must justify that qualification or re-incarnate-- under a much less liberal governmental form. We are established as a nation under the spiritual directive of "liberty and justice for ALL--and the "ALL" does not mean just Americans. The citizenry of this nation are principally derived from European, Asiatic, and African backgrounds but, because of consciousness-quality we were at-tuned to the democratic principles of living and we were permitted--timed--to incarnate under a governmental form based on those principles.

The horoscope of the United States of America pictures the Sun and three planets in the sign Cancer--we are truly a "nest" for humans of all kinds of racial, national, and religious backgrounds. The Sun in Cancer is ruler of the fourth house, and in that sign it is in its own twelfth house-sign--the "redemption-pattern." Cancer is on the second and third cusps; the Sun and two of the planets are in the second house; Mercury, ruler of the Gemini-Ascendant and dispositor of the Gemini Mars and Uranus, is in Cancer in the third house; the Moon, ruler of second and third, is in Aquarius; Saturn, ruler of eighth and ninth houses, is exalted in Libra and trine to the Moon. Our "national psychological base" (there are no planets in the fourth-house-sign Leo) is focused on this "planetary gathering" in the sign Cancer; it might be interpreted as: material substance-exchanges and education according to democratic governmental principles as the spiritualized source of our national evolution and progress.

Have we ever perpetrated outrage on these Principles? Our treatment of our American Indian and Negro citizenry says YES. Have we ever wasted our fabulous endowment of natural resources? The answer is YES. Did we, as a democratically-inspired nation, permit the buying and selling of fellow-humans? The history of Negro slavery in this country says YES. Have we encouraged the weaknesses of other peoples? The history of war-debt defaults of other nations says YES. This is December, 1950-- newspapers in recent weeks have revealed how American materials are permitted to be sold to the very nation we are warring against--a repetition, in part, of the story of scrap-iron selling to the Japanese during their attacks on the Chinese people in the 1930 's. This, on the part of a democratic government, is certainly the supreme blasphemy against our principle of "justice for all."

Further, to say, as some do, that "nothing can be done about it" is the supreme utmost of spineless acquiescence; such violations of our powers as substance-stewards must be stopped. Since a chemical expression only outpictures an inner state, to say that we are "afraid of the Chinese communists," "afraid of the Russians," "afraid of atomic bombardment" is only half-truth. We are afraid of the results of our own violation of principle and what we are going through now in the Orient is the result of our traducing those principles which inspired the founding of this nation. Food for thought! Let every American take stock of how he lives his citizenship. American citizenship is a blessing to be honored by living it--it is not "just something dropped in our laps" to be taken advantage of in wasteful, thoughtless ways. To the degree that we express according to religious intolerance, racial hatred, financial corruption and personal dis- integrity do we disqualify for this privilege; to the degree that we help others to help themselves, steward our resources intelligently and for the best good of all on earth, keep our minds open to further appreciation of the qualities and rights of all do we maintain our democratic qualifications. We, as a nation, are democratic power; we, as individual Americans, are microcosms of that power and it is our spiritual responsibility and our personal joy to manifest that ideal while we are incarnate. That, and nothing less, will insure our individual and national security. We must, as Americans and Earthians, function from the psychological base--the "power-pabulum"--or our spiritual principles. The Capricorn regeneration and fulfillment of democratic idealism is that which is "matured" from the Cancer-base. To realize this maturity is the meaning of "being American" and the meaning of "being democratic Earthians." 


Studies in Astrology
by
Elman Bacher

Volume IX
Chapter III
Diameter, Quadrant, and Decanate

For the pursuance of this material, a brief review of the Generic Spectrum will be necessary.

The zodiac is not just a ''belt;" it is an emanation of vibratory qualities starting at the first degree of the cardinal fire-sign Aries; this point is, abstractly, the initiation of the circumference of the vibratory wheel of astrological science. This point is the objectification-incarnation--of the potentials inherent in the central point of the circle. The Ascendant-radius--the left horizontal--is the "projection of potentials from subjectivity to objectivity." In any given circle, the same radius is used to manifest the circle; hence all of the house-cusps in the wheel are emanations of the Ascendant-radius and they picture the unfoldment of generic Consciousness in experience and realization of the ideal through spiritualized transmutations and expressions.

The mandala which pictures the structure of generic quality is the twelve-housed wheel with the signs Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capricorn on the cusps of the first, fourth, seventh, and tenth houses, respectively. The horizontal and vertical diameters, intersecting at the center, form the cross of incarnation; the straight lines which connect the cardinal cusps form the evolutionary field by which humanity has experience in relationship with each other. In this mandala, we see the two- field bisection of the circle; two diameters creating two pairs of semi- circles. These diameters represent the two-fold expression of Polarity; that which generates (Capricorn-Cancer: the diameter of parentage), and that which is generated (Aries-Libra: the Ascendant and its complement). This mandala illustrates, in astrological symbol the Master-number twenty-two. Two is the only digit which gives the same result (four) when added to itself and when multiplied by itself. Twenty-two is the number of mastery expressing in form- -it is the higher octave of complementation and it is significant that every human being must fulfill evolutionary experience by incarnation in both physical sexes. The four cardinal signs pictured in this mandala comprise the incarnated way by which the manhood-womanhood of every human being evolves through relationship-experience and distills its spiritualizations from which the Ideal is manifested. All human relationships--either biological or otherwise--are derived from this archetypal foundation: the bi-polar generator and the bi-polar generated.

Since the elemental trines symbolize the spiritualization of the generic qualities, we derive our generic spectrum from the relationship of exaltation-signs of the rulers of these four signs. Mars (male begotten and ruler of Aries) is exalted--matured-in Capricorn, ruled by Saturn, the father-symbol; Saturn is exalted in Libra ruled by Venus and complement of Mars's sign Aries; Venus is exalted in Pisces, third octave of the water-trine, the last sign in the zodiacal sequence, and this trine is initiated by the cardinal sign Cancer, ruled by the Moon--symbol of Mother-- and complement of Saturn 's Capricorn.

Hence the fire and earth signs, since they are" initiated " by male symbols, are the male signs; the air and water signs, initiated by female symbols, are the female signs. Since every human being, as male or as female, is bipolar, we recognize a two-fold division of the male signs and the female signs into masculine and feminine. The fire-signs form the first half of the male half of the zodiac so they are the masculine male signs; the earth-signs follow, in sequence (Taurus follows Aries), so they are the feminine male signs. The air signs, initiated by the cardinal sign Libra, ruled by Venus, represent the masculine half of the female signs; the water- signs, initiated by Cancer, comprise the feminine female signs. Thus we see the entire zodiac representing a two-fold expression of two-fold polarity; from the first degree of Aries, the most masculine point, to the thirtieth degree of Pisces, the most feminine point. List the signs in this sequence and learn for future reference.

The lower half (below the horizontal diameter) of the wheel is initiated by Aries: the upper half is initiated by Libra, as "reflection" of the lower half. The occult key-note of the first degree of Aries--the Ascendant-point of the great Mandala--is I AM. In this Ascendant- line is implied all the potentials shown in the zodiacal unfoldment and the contents of the astrological wheel. Therefore, it naturally follows that in the thirty degrees of Aries is implied the "contents" of the upper half of the wheel. This "content" is symbolically implied by the last fifteen degrees of the sign. The "cusp" of the sixteenth degree of the sign is the potential of the completed horizontal diameter of the wheel. When the left horizontal radius is "unfolded" to form a completed diameter, the "extension" results in what we call the cusp of the seventh house--the initiating point of the upper half of the circle. Since any degree of any sign can appear as the Ascendant of a horoscope, we recognize that the division of any sign into two halves of fifteen degrees each represents a symbolic picture of the polarity of that sign in embryo, and though the author, at this point, has not reached any specific conclusion as to the significant difference of planets placed in the first fifteen degrees of a sign and those placed in the last fifteen degrees, the picture is suggested that planets placed in the second half of the thirty degrees, if expressed unregeneratively, are potentials for much more "effective" negative karma--in the sense that being in the "polarity-half" of the sign, their negative expressions imply a possibility of being reflected in future incarnations by other people with whom the subject will have relationship. In other words, the second fifteen degrees, by analogy, might be termed the "feminine half" of the sign. "Feminine" means "reflective." Hence if we wish to avoid future suffering through painful reaction to others, we owe it to ourselves to regenerate planets so placed, the implication being that in future (unfoldment in Time-Space) those planetary vibrations will focalize our complementary relationship patterns and we will much more definitely "get back from others what we've dished out this time." Divide each house of a Great Mandala in two equal parts; place your natal planetary positions in this wheel and see in which half of their signs the planets fall. Perhaps you, as an inquiring student, can reach a conclusion in this matter. If you have squares or oppositions between planets placed in the latter fifteen degrees of their signs, do you feel more responsive to people who express negative qualities represented by those planets than you do to those who negatively reflect your "first fifteen-degree " planets? Do you feel that, with careful analysis, you can determine whether your first fifteen- degree planets give you greater freedom of direct expression than do the latter fifteen-degree planets? Analyze your planetary squares and oppositions from this standpoint and see if the polarity-pattern implied helps to clarify your reaction-capacities and expression-capacities.

QUADRANTS: In the Great Mandala, the sub-division of the first house--and the sign Aries--into four quadrants of 71/2 degrees each pictures the "embryonic state" of the cardinal cross. Applying the Law of Correspondence we relate this division of one sign to the four-fold division of the entire wheel. Starting with Aries and "unfolding" the wheel counter-clockwise, we find that each succeeding quadrant is initiated respectively by Cancer, Libra, Capricorn.

The subdivision of a sign into two sections of fifteen degrees each is particularly applicable to the study of the opposition aspects and all complementary patterns generally. The subdivision of a sign into quadrants, however, applies to the analysis of the square aspects, since every square aspect is, allowing for orb, a pattern of 90-degree relationship and each quadrant of the wheel is a 90-degree division. The division into quadrants (by degrees and minutes) represents zero to seven degrees, thirty minutes; seven degrees, thirty-one minutes to fifteen degrees; fifteen degrees, one minute to twenty-two degrees, thirty minutes; twenty-two degrees, thirty-one minutes to twenty-nine degrees, fifty-nine minutes. The next "step" brings us to zero of the next sign.

There are three "crosses" implied in the structure of the twelve signs: cardinal, fixed, and mutable. In cycle unfoldment from the ascendant of the Great Mandala, the three crosses appear four times, in the four quadrants of the wheel: Aries, Taurus, Gemini; Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius; Capricorn, Aquarius, and Pisces. Each cardinal "initiation" is a new way of saying I AM--as extensions of the basic I AM of Aries; each cross represents a pattern of growth and unfoldment through experience in the two-fold expression of two-fold polarity; we evolve through phases of male and female Life-takers and Life-givers. The "crosses" simply represent the processes by which we distill wisdom from our experiences and unfold the inner resources of love toward the attainment of realization of the ideal. Since, in a correctly calculated horoscope, every planet is placed where it is by due process of Law, there must be a valuable key in the placement of planets by quadrant. Each individual sign of the zodiac has its particular planetary ruler, as basic focalizer of the generic quality of the sign. But since thirty degrees represents a sequence of sign quality and because the Law of Correspondence applies to astrological structure as it does to any other manifestation, let us consider the placement of planets by quadrant in terms of secondary rulerships. The first quadrant of a mutable sign is ruled by the planetary ruler of the sign; the second quadrant is secondarily ruled by the planet that rules the next sign of that cross; the third quadrant is secondarily ruled by the planet that rules the next cross- sign and the fourth quadrant is secondarily ruled by the next. For example:



Capricorn: Primary ruler: Saturn.
Capricorn is the cardinal sign.
    First quadrant.....secondary ruler--Saturn
    Second quadrant....Mars--ruler of Aries
    Third quadrant....Moon--ruler of Cancer
    Fourth quadrant....Venus--ruler of Libra

    Leo: Primary ruler: the Sun.
Leo is a fixed sign.
    First quadrant....the Sun--ruler of Leo
    Second quadrant....Pluto--ruler of Scorpio
    Third quadrant....Uranus--ruler of Aquarius
    Fourth quadrant....Venus--ruler of Taurus

    Pisces: Primary ruler: Neptune.
Pisces is a mutable sign.
    First quadrant....Neptune--ruler of Pisces
    Second quadrant....Mercury--ruler of Gemini
    Third quadrant....Mercury--ruler of Virgo
    Fourth quadrant....Jupiter--ruler of Sagittarius

Note that the extension of the first and third quadrants and the second and fourth quadrants would picture two aspects of polarity; this composite of polarity is pictured in the horoscopical wheel as the two diameters of each cross. Give careful consideration to your square aspects and the planets involved with reference to the secondary rulerships; the secondary rulers act as "hand-maidens" or "right-hand-men" to the primary rulers and their influence is effective in analysis of the planetary expression-qualities.

DECANATES: In the study of decanates, we come to an analysis of each sign from the standpoint of its spiritual potentials. Just as the three crosses of four signs each are "unfolded" from the Ascendant of the Great Mandala, so the four generic trines of three signs each are "unfolded" from the Ascendant. The fifteen-degree and seven and a half degree divisions proceed--as "experience-unfoldment" through the zodiac counter- clockwise from the Ascendant; the picture shown is that of Humanity moving through its experience-patterns on the "on-ward-and-upward" path--from level to level, ever ascending through evolutionary processes. However, in the cycle of generic trines, the path is clockwise--and this is not a "cyclic" motion. It is an evaluation of the zodiacal powers from the standpoint of the spiritual potential. As we saw earlier in this discussion, it is based on the exaltation-points of the planets ruling the signs of structure--the cardinal signs.

The spiritual potential of the generic quality of each zodiacal sign is three-fold; the archetypal key-words are (1) Power; (2) Love and (3) Wisdom. The second and third of these octaves are the emotional and mental perfections by which the essential power of each cardinal sign is released, in transmuted expression. The decanates of each sign are the division of the sign into three groups of ten degrees each. The second and third decanates of a sign symbolize the embryonic stage of the Love-Wisdom potentials; these potentials are expressed in the wheel by the two signs which correspond to the decanate; they are the two other signs of the same element as the particular cardinal. In the fixed and mutable signs, we see the Law of Correspondence and the Principle of Recapitulation at work and thus we can attribute to each decanate its appropriate co-ruler--as follows:

Fire signs: First decanate: Aries-Mars; second: Leo-Sun; third: Sagittarius-Jupiter.

Earth signs: First: Capricorn-Saturn; second: Taurus-Venus; third: Virgo-Mercury.

Air signs: First: Libra-Venus; second: Aquarius- Uranus; third: Gemini-Mercury.

Water signs: First: Cancer-Moon; second: Scorpio- Pluto; third: Pisces-Neptune.

The Hermetic Law of Correspondence is beautifully evidenced, particularly, by one example of this decanate-analysis. The second decanate of each element is the "Fixed-sign" decanate. When we extend the three decanates of each element into the twelve signed wheel, we see that the fixed-sign decanates become the midpoint of each quadrant of the wheel. "Middle of sign" becomes, by correspondence, "middle of quadrant of the circle." The midpoint of each fixed sign-house (Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, Aquarius) (second, fifth, eighth, eleventh) when connected by straight lines becomes the symbol of the square aspect--the arch-symbol of congestion; since the fixed decanate of each sign is the love decanate we see how the astrological mandala points clearly to the spiritualized releasement of emotional congestions: that of expression of the love-consciousness. Each sign (regardless of its generic quality) reaches its apex of compression at the midpoint--the jointure of the fifteenth and sixteenth degrees. This jointure is exactly in the middle of the second decanate. The cardinal decanate--the first ten degrees of any sign--carries out, by the Law of correspondence, the "beginningness" attribute of the cardinal signs as they represent the basic "turning-points" in the progress through the wheel. The third decanates (the last ten degrees) carry out the "transitional quality" of the mutable signs since, after the midpoint of the sign has been passed the "energies" begin to "recede" from the basic quality of the sign and approach the "modulation" into the next sign. So the mutable signs of the Zodiac form the transitional points from one ninety-degree quadrant into the next quadrant.

Of what practical value is all this, you ask; and you have a right to ask. When we remember that "every problem contains its own cure" we can study afflicted and congested planets from the standpoint of their placement by sign-quadrant and sign-decanate and extract from that information a great deal that tells us about the inherent possibilities for regenerating the expression of that planet. For example: a congested planet is in the twenty-sixth degree of Capricorn; this is in the Libra quadrant, secondarily ruled by Venus; it is in the Virgo decanate, secondarily ruled by Mercury. Its placement in the Libra quadrant (Capricorn 's fourth quadrant) is analogous to the relationship between Capricorn and Aries in the Great Mandala--Capricorn being Aries' fourth quadrant; the key-word is responsibility-fulfillment; the Libra sub-vibration conveys "relationship- harmonization" through balance and right exchange. The Virgo decanate (the third octave--Wisdom) of the earth-trine tells us that the spiritual purpose of the experiences represented by the congested planet is the unfoldment of greater understanding; the person must be willing to learn from his experience in this matter; to the degree that he seeks to learn, keeps an open mind receptive to instruction and guidance will he utilize his spiritual resource for decrystallizing the congestion. If he, through false pride, stubbornness, etc., closes his mind to guidance he closes the door to his unfoldments; relationship-harmonization cannot be established and the congestion intensifies.

Example: a congested planet in the ninth degree of Leo (fixed Fire--ruled by the Sun). This degree is in the Scorpio quadrant of Leo (second division of seven and a half degrees) and in the Aries decanate (first ten degrees). Since the planet is referred to as "congested" and it is in a fixed sign, we recognize that the congestion is intense--being in a fixed sign and in the Scorpio quadrants Scorpio, in relationship to Leo, is analogous to Cancer in relationship to Aries in the great Mandala; this relationship is "congestion in family-relationship," "adherence to the nest," ''parental complex" and (possibly) congestion of the Love resource by the exigencies of the sexual desire-nature. However, this point is in the Aries decanate--first decanate of a fire sign--and the spiritualization of the Mars vibration is courage. Such a person will find that subjective enterprise and awareness of his individual rights will serve as a power-releasement to decrystallize the congestions to the Leo-planet. The primary rulership of Leo by the Sun makes a positive attitude a "must" in dealing with these problems.

And so on--with other congested patterns. Relate the decanate and quadrant to the abstract picturing of the Great Mandala and you will find that every variation of "problems" to be found in the charts of human-beings contain, by their placement, a direct clue to the vibratory solutions. Expressions of planetary powers through the spiritualized implications of the signs is the "go ahead" signal for evolutionary progress and harmonious unfoldment of potentials. 

Chapter IV
Light--Part I

En-Light-en-ment is always an act of revelation. It does not mean, as some suppose, to give something new to the thing under consideration or even to give something new to the person who is considering the thing. It is always an act by which, in relative degree, the truth of the thing under consideration may be more clearly realized. Such realization can never be "given" by one person to another because realization is always a subjective experience; the person who experiences it can only do so when he is suitably conditioned and timed for it. His suitable conditioning and timing-- synchronization of desire for Truth with capacity to utilize that which is realized--makes it possible for him to react to the stimulus of another person or an experience in such a way that his consciousness of the thing considered opens to a relatively higher degree of Truth. We may say that at that moment he has "gained more wisdom about the thing"--his awareness of the nature of the thing is then "wise-er" than it was.

In these days of expanding inquiry into every facet of human experience and functioning it is really not surprising that many people all over the world are opening their minds to clearer realizations of the nature of the occult art-science called "astrology." This series of articles under the general heading of LIGHT, of which this is the first discourse, is presented to these inquirers in the expectation that those who are now "suitably conditioned and timed" will find, upon perusal, the experience of realizing clearer pictures of what astrology really is and how knowledge of its nature may be more constructively and philosophically utilized. Its purpose is completely consistent with its nature--its purpose is to en-light-en and its nature is the symbolic presentation of the evolving consciousness of Humanity, "en masse" or individually.

Sometimes we become more vividly aware of a thing by consideration of what it is not. Basically and essentially, astrology is not a study of events; in terms of one person's horoscope it is not a study of "the people in his life ;" it is not a superstition, though many people have used it in such ways as to give evidence of their superstitious fear of life and experience; it is most certainly not a study of "good and bad luck; " its primary purpose is not to delineate the timing of events, past or future; and--give this considerable reflection--it is not a "study of the stars."

The "nots" of astrology mentioned above could well be referred to as the "knots" in most people's concepts of astrology. Two of them are based on un-truth, the others contain sufficient content of knowledge or wisdom to make astrology of constructive utility--but only when the practitioner is motivated by high ideals of helpfulness to others, and when he is the kind of person who is ever ready to consider new revealments of astrological truth. No person now incarnate who is able to use astrological knowledge is "new to the subject;" all such people are recapitulating knowledge of the subject gained in former lives and, in justice to that past effort, effort is now being required to unravel the "knots" of congested concepts, superstitions, and half-truths by expanding the mind and enlarging the "will-to-Truth." The name of this art-science contains the clue to what it truth-fully is; let us analyze it for continual use during the perusal of this series.

The "astr" of astrology is one of many hundreds of root-words derived from ancient languages which has both esoteric and exoteric meaning. Exoterically it refers to "star," and in this connotation astrology is understood to be a study of the influence on human character and destiny exerted by the stars in the heavens, as though we humans "have to do what the stars tell us to do--or be or think--or develop. Such an irrational concept of "starry influence" has the disintegrating effect of intensifying man's fears concerning "fate" as well as of his own weaknesses and ignorance. On the plane of intellectual exercise even the most exoteric approaches can be helpful in so far as people can become acquainted with a particular set of symbols, and the study of the interpretative key-words of these symbols does result in training the faculty of abstract thought. But, because knowledge without use is not astrology's reason-for-being, we must look more deeply into the word itself to realize the truths of its purpose.

Esoterically the "astr" of astrology refers to light. Man has, for countless ages, looked upon the stars in the heavens as symbols of purest light. The astronomer studies the heavenly bodies in terms of their distance from us, their size, weight, density, and spatial inter- relationships. The astrologer studies what they symbolize as lights of consciousness.

Again esoterically, there are two connotations to the word " light." One is that form of light that makes visual perception possible to those who are incarnate. In terms of manifested life, light is a creative power, an attribute of all manifested things which possess a creative or manifestive potential. But, before such light can "be" there must be that which creates the visual light and that is the light of consciousness. The creative consciousness of that which we call "life" (for lack of a more specific word) through the "stepped down," creative consciousness of galactic and solar logoi--all of which are evolving--originates any and all forms and degrees of light that can be perceived throughout the manifested universe. In other words, perceptible light is the negative polarity, the manifested reflection of the positive creative attribute-consciousness. The opening statements of the book of Genesis contain this one: "God said, "Let there be light and there was light". Whether one believes that the word "God" refers to cosmic creative essence or to the creative will and mind of a solar logos does not matter in this connection; what is to be considered is that consciousness of creative power was established and that light was the first gesture of the creative act. The "darkness" referred to refers to the state of unformed life which we call "chaos." "Chaos" does not mean, as some think, "nothing;" it is the one life essence which is to be utilized by creative wills and minds for manifestivity. Manifested light is the projection into manifestivity of creative intelligence. Consciousness is that degree of awareness -en-light-en-ment of power that is the prime requisite of creative action. A solar logos is aware of the power to create-manifest--through the establishment of a central body--"sun"--and an emanation of other bodies-- "planets" which, in toto, comprise its field of evolution. The logos evolves through the evolution of its myriads of life-waves and forms inhabiting the planetary bodies; macrocosm and microcosm are inter-dependent--the evolution of each serves, and is coincidental with, the evolution of the other. By the attribute of consciousness and the faculty of choice, humans exert their creative potential to further their evolution. We humans are not "creators" but, having the power of conscious regeneration, we reveal the potential for creativity. As our solar logos--God--is, so we are destined to become through the unfolding of awareness-consciousness--of our true identity and, correspondingly, powers. If, then, astrology is not a "study of the stars" but a study, in archetypal symbols, of consciousness we may shed our accrued misconceptions of the subject and look at horoscopes--our own particularly!-- for what they really are and for what they really are for.

The statement that astrology is a study of the influence of Sun, Moon, and planets upon us--as individual or collective humans--is not untruthful but, for our purpose, there is another approach to the subject which goes deeper and must therefore be considered. As far as "effect of planets on humans" is concerned let us say that astrology is the study of the correspondences between planetary vibratory powers and our actual or potential powers. We, as humans, are fraternally related to all other humans as expressions of the same archetype on this planet. We are also--but more indirectly--fraternal to all expressions of life on this planet. Our habitation--Earth--is the manifested body of a Being which, in its octave of functioning, is fraternal to the planetary Regents of our solar system; therefore, in myriads of levels of correspondences, all on this system are inter-related. And, all are the manifested ideas of our Creator--our Solar Logos, "Father-Mother God." Since the planets of our system are the embodiments of Beings whose consciousness of life qualifies them for that office, and each one has its particular evolutionary function and effect on the total system or any factor of it, we, as humans and students of astrology, study our horoscopes to become aware of higher levels of consciousness of life through knowledge or awareness of our potentials in correspondence to the qualities and significance of those beings whose consciousness provides structure and pattern to our system. The astrological symbols of Sun, Moon, and planets designate what we call "rulership" of parts of our bodies, qualities of personality and character, the principles inherent in our capacities for expression and reaction, the vibratory qualifications of our experiences and relationships. All of these factors are, together or individually considered, for the one purpose of enlarging and purifying consciousness--"en-light-en-ing ourselves," or "serving to make the self more aware of the light of the Self-and the Self is the Spirit which identifies man's kinship and unity with his Creator.

In order more firmly to establish a new approach or understanding, it has been found to be very helpful to stop speaking of the subject under consideration in the habit-patterns which one has used for perhaps a long time. There are several "cliches" which astrological students have learned and used and, in order to open more extensively to an awareness of "Astro-Light," we may have to practice some new terms and references. For example:

We find it very easy and natural to say, in reference to a person's horoscope: "This person has a bad Uranus." Look at that statement for a moment from the standpoint of becoming more aware of what it says. In the first place no one can "have" any planet; in the second place no planet is "bad." How can it be, being a divine creation? Let's revise this a little: "This person's consciousness of the principles symbolized by Uranus is congested, unorganized, disorganized, immature or unevolved." We do not say that the person, therefore, is a bad person or an unlucky one or an evil one or an unfortunate one. We simply mean that the person's development--through no one knows how long a time--has not included very much regenerative attention to the aspects of the Spirit which are characterized by the planetary symbol of Uranus; we mean that he has in store considerable experience in growth and development and integration to make on that point. But that does not make him bad, or evil, or even unfortunate--it simply means that he has development to make of a specialized kind in his evolutionary becoming. The horoscope is a symbolic registration of consciousness--it is not a picture of static darkness but its great value lies in picturing the essences of the person 's life-assignments and relative evolutionary status.

We say--often (oh, and so often!): "This position of Saturn and this aspect to Saturn makes this person a miser." Hold on a moment! All the heavenly host together cannot "make anyone a miser." The Saturn-registration in the horoscope pictures an action of the person 's consciousness--or lack of consciousness--regarding possession of material goods. Miserliness is an unbalance in consciousness--it is over-attention to acquisition to counter-balance a deeply-rooted fear of loss. Stop this unjust attitude toward Saturn--he tries so hard to teach us important lessons and one of them is intelligent utility of material means. He says: "My nature corresponds to your potential for learning--among other things--to use material substance and means intelligently. " Until you take into your consciousness the awareness of this principle for your own up-going, I shall have to speak to you through your fear of loss; when you learn to use; in a balanced way, the particular power of consciousness which I symbolize you will know that I have always been your friend and your teacher. Agree with what I represent as a power and quality of consciousness and your approach to your own Masterhood will be furthered in freedom and joy; you will then know that you do not have to blame me further for your fears and insecurities." We say--sometimes with a little smouldering of envy: "What a lucky guy! he has something-or-other trine Jupiter. " Jupiter smiles back at us in his kindly, understanding way and says to us--perhaps a little sad that we are envious: "I have so often been called the planet of abundance and good fortune--may I remind you that I simply symbolize your own consciousness of your own power to improve, enlarge, expand your nature and conditions; you do not 'get anything from me '--you express my principle of enlargement and expansion through optimism, kindliness, generosity, and fearlessness; what you give out, in expression, you attract back; if your consciousness of one is revealed through unbalances of extravagance, over-indulgence, false pride, or greediness I cannot register regeneratively in your chart because you, in your consciousness of me, have not qualified for such a registration as this man has. You need not envy his development. My principle serves all. Take it into your consciousness of life, make it your own by good action and your consciousness will, sooner or later, unfold awareness and manifestation of that particular form of Light which I represent."

And so on--with each of the other planetary points In conclusion we must consider one other for its special significance in our horoscope--the symbol of the Sun itself.

The author suggests that each student of astrology who feels so inclined inaugurate the practice of placing the traditional symbol for the Sun--the point circumscribed by a circle--at the center of each horoscope; this symbol, by correspondence, is that of our Creator, our own spiritual essence, our seed-atom and the eternal, indestructible will-to-live which characterizes consciousness throughout all time and space. This is the most simply constructed, the most perfectly focussed and the most purely archetypal of all astrological symbols--it is fitting that it should be used to designate the Human's consciousness of Divine Source, Identity, and Attribute. Another symbol--the author suggests a half-circle surmounting a horizontal line--may be legitimately and effectively used as the Sun in the horoscope, as a "planetary factor"--ruler of the fixed fire-sign Leo. Since this symbol is subject to patterning and aspects, qualifications and movement as is any other planetary symbol, it may be studied to represent the evolution of the person's consciousness of his Sun-nature. The appearance of the circular Sun-symbol (the "Spirit-symbol") corresponds to the appearance of the horoscopical circle--both centered by the same point. The "planetary Sun- symbol" corresponds in appearance with the upper semi-circle of the horoscope, the horizontal line corresponds to the horizontal diameter of the horoscope-- the "I AM of the individual's consciousness and the counterparting of the Ascendant by the cusp of the seventh house. Also as a picture this symbol suggests the sunrise at dawn--and its use in the horoscope is to keep us reminded of our consciousness of solar attributes which we are seeking to unfold through our evolutionary experience. 

Chapter V
Light--Part II

For the purposes of clarifying the expression and understanding of this material, we will agree that the word "light," initialed by the small "l," will refer to visually perceptible vibration; "Light," initialed by the capital "L," will refer to Consciousness; consciousness, with a small "c," will refer to human awareness.

It is a wonderful thing to realize, upon reflection, that for countless ages human beings have revealed consciousness of the occult or esoteric nature of light as it has been--and is--perceived in terms of black, white, and the spectrum-colors. The subject has figured prominently in programs of philosophical teaching and learning in many lands and, in these later days, it has become an important factor in the fields of objective and subjective therapy. Those who are now sponsoring and furthering this subject in healing-work are recapitulating knowledge gained in former lives. It is not "new" in this age, it is simply being restated for the spiritual needs of present humanity. Inspirational responsiveness to the potency of natural or colored light and to that of beautiful color in substances serves to recharge the aura--which is always seen as color or colors in clairvoyant study--of the ailing person in such a way that he becomes conscious of a spiritual heightening; the condition of the aura--the etheric matrix--is strengthened and harmonized in degree and, in the same degree, the physical body is brought into healthier alignment. Not all humans have known, factually, about the aura and its significance to their existence, but it may be safely surmised that all, at some time or another, have experienced the uplift "inside themselves" which attends response to the spiritual value of light in its many beautiful and inspiring aspects of color.

Give this considerable--and meditative--thought: Reaction to is evidence of correspondence with. We cannot respond to anything or anyone with which or with whom we do not have some degree of negative or positive affinity. The indisputable fact that a human can respond to the shade or quality of a color reveals that "something" in him has affinity to "something" in the color, or the black, or white. The equally indisputable fact that such response can lower or raise the quality of his auric, bodily, and spiritual condition reveals that his consciousness of the color has affinity with the Consciousness which is symbolized by the color. Power, in one degree or another, is the only thing that can change any vibratory state--chemical, emotional, mental, or soulic. Therefore, if a human's chemical, emotional, mental, or soulic condition is lowered or lessened by his response to black, white, or color he reveals a weakened or immature consciousness of power within himself. If, however, his condition is improved, strengthened, purified or harmonized, his response to the black, white, or color reveals an affinity between his Spirit and the spirit which the black, white, or color symbolizes to his consciousness. Reflect a moment on those occasions when your reaction to a particular shade of green, red, black, or combination of colors provoked a feeling of nausea, morbidity, despondency, or irritation; in that state of feeling were you aware of joy, health, harmony, peace? Your unhappy reaction revealed a lack of inner mastery over yourself--something in the power of the color-quality stimulated a corresponding quality in your astral, mental or soulic nature. Your reaction, which served to "lower your-tone," simply revealed a need for you to regenerate some factor of your inner constitution. Don't waste time and energy "blaming the color." With inner regeneration through redirection of powers your improved response-capacity will serve to reveal to you hitherto unrecognized beauty-value and power in the color. Regeneration of our consciousness always serves to reveal the Spirit to us.

In capacity and inclination to respond with negative result to states of light, humans, as individuals, vary considerably. But there is one such state to which humanity--collectively or individually-- has reacted with much more negativism than to any other, for ages of time, and that is Black. In the cosmic sense Black is life undifferentiated and unmanifested; White is the consciousness, the Light, which makes all creation and manifestation possible. By reversal in the plane of physical perception, Black is the congestion of all Color and White is the state of color undifferentiated. Therefore, White has symbolized to the subconscious recognitions of humanity the state of purity, highest spirituality and perfect Light. Black has symbolized that which cannot be perceived in terms of its parts or factors. Since our cognitions and recognitions of phenomena depend on our ability to "differentiate things from things" we, in early evolution, congested on fear and insecurity and desperation in our reaction to the blackness (no light) of night-time. This reaction was an individual and collective experience and still is to this day for many people. As beings who have been conscious (incarnate and/or discarnate) for ages and ages of time we cannot even imagine a state of "not-being-ness" or "un-existence." Therefore as a "color" Black symbolizes those things we call "death, " "the unknown, "the congestions of extremely unregenerate conscious-ness--in short, all of those things toward which we respond with feelings of being obstructed or threatened in our progress through existence. To the degree that we align or relate ourselves to these darkened states do we intensify our incapacity and inclination to exist in terms of Life-givingness and Life-expressiveness; we deplete our consciousness of the Light of Spirit. However, "blackness" in the soul does not and cannot mean "life-stopping-ness" in any absolute sense; it simply indicates a state of congestion that, in turn, indicates an urgent need for regenerative measures. The Light is and is for us always; a human may create much painful karma by going into action on the basis of his relatedness to blackness of soul, but that karma, in turn, provides him with subsequent experience which turns the tide for his regeneration and evolvement toward new recognitions of the Light of God and the Light within himself.

In the cosmic sense, again, White is the color- symbol of the purity of innocence--consciousness as yet undifferentiated or qualified by incarnated experience. White symbolizes the "color-identity" of Virgin Spirits before their involutionary descent as individualizations into bodies. At the other end White is the purified consciousness of the individual after completion of his evolution as a human-- his clear, pure unified realization of his true identity as a creation of the divine. At the start he was purity unaware of his pureness; at the end he will be purity realized. His inspirational response to the occult value of White in his evolving incarnated state is evidence of his Spirit's omni- presence; remember that if the human did not have within himself something that corresponds to the pure perfection of White he could not respond to it with spiritualizing results. Like attracts--and recognizes-like.

To all students who are delving into the spiritual and esoteric meanings of astrology the suggestion is here made that you become more concentratedly and more consciously aware of the meaning to you of Black and White as "color-shades," as personal and spiritual quality-symbols, as vibratory powers which stimulate you one way or another, and as figures of speech found in poetry and allegory and legend. From the vantage-point of philosophical education and understanding become more aware than ever before how the collective subconscious mind and feeling of humanity have interpreted these two light-symbols; Black and White--and your cognitions of them--have much significance to your spiritual approach to astrology and to your evolving ability to interpret horoscopes--your own or those of other people. The symbolism of these two words is most profound. Of which--more anon.

The spectrum-colors are light-symbols of soul- qualities. They refer to the most spiritualized consciousness of body, mind, and emotion which the human has as yet realized or can ever realize--as long as he is evolving in the identity of human being. A man of great wisdom once said that colors are the sufferings and joys in the existence of light and it is surmised that he meant that colors correspond with--or have correspondence to--the states of suffering and joy which humans experience in so far as humans can perceive light and were created by Light. We have been instructed that beyond the range of colors as we now know them there are infinite variations and extensions of light-vibration which can be perceived only through extrasensory perception on this plane or in functioning in higher dimensions of existence. But there again, we must have affinity with the conditions of soul or consciousness represented by these color-extensions before we can perceive them.

Since the aura of a human is an individual matter- -resulting in his degree of realizing his Spirit-identity--the color--shades and color qualities which may symbolize his spiritual state at any point in his development may reveal, here and there, a darkened condition that suggests a tendency toward "blackness" in one or more of his colors corresponding, of course, to a state of relative congestion, obstruction, or "little death" in his consciousness due to accrued fear, hatred, or what not. Remember that blackness indicates the tendency toward congestion, or "chaos," in human consciousness but its presence, in aura or consciousness, is helpful in sofar as it reveals the need for regeneration. The black indication is acting as a "barometer of the soul" in a specialized way. To the degree that a person's responsiveness to pure, luminous, and potent color becomes more and more a part of his natural functioning do we see evidence of his soul-striving, his aspirational urges, his love, his unselfishness, his idealism, and his devotion to establishment of Good.

A person's aura may reveal an area filled with a rich, intense shade of a certain color. This color-quality will reveal the evidence of considerable effort and attention having been given to a certain phase of development. Correspondingly his personality will reveal a pronounced ability along that line of endeavor, and the characteristics of mind and emotion will mark him in a very individualistic way. His "soul is strong and focused" on that particular point. But spiritual development and realization is indicated by the large soul-body, and the colors of the aura rather than being deep and intense in their shading, will tend toward the pastel quality--being "charged with White." There is a very significant and interesting correspondence to be found between the "tendency toward Whiteness "in the auras of spiritually-evolved humans and their personal inclination toward simplicity of manner and purity of integrity, motives, and purposes. Spiritualization results in simplification and so, with evolvement, the colors which represent the person's consciousness tend toward the simplification of Whiteness. However pastel a color-shade may be, in the auras of spiritually- evolved humans these lovely and delicate shades of pastel color have great vibratory potency or "impinging power." Such phrases as "drop by drop (the gentle unobtrusive action of water) wears away the stone" and "a soft answer turneth away wrath" and "forgive your enemies" are correspondences of power between the en-whitened pastel colors of the spiritualized aura and the en- spiritual-ized consciousness of a highly evolved human. Also the presence of "pastel potency" in the aura reveals the degree of integration of the person's consciousness toward all planes of his functioning--the various aspects of his being and consciousness are, in degree, unified and harmonized, one with the other.

All of these observations regarding Black, White, and Colors have direct and practical spiritual application to the study of horoscopes. When we are ready to stop our use of misconceptions we will find that:

The point, which should be indicated by a small round dot, at the center of the horoscope is a symbol--and the only valid one we have--of chaos, life un-differentiated, out of which all manifestation is made. That central point, applying to the horoscope of the individual human, is the Idea (Humanity) conceived by the Divine Mind of our Logos; it is from that Idea that we, as an earthian archetype, were projected into individualized experience. A circle circumscribing that central dot symbolizes our Logos as an individualized creative Consciousness and Its manifestivity as the Sun--the central body, or nucleus, of our solar system. Since man is Spirit this composite symbol of dot and circle pictures his Spiritual Essence, his Seed-atom and his Potential for perfecting all of his bodies. Then, from that central symbol the left horizontal line is emanated to form the Ascendant-line of the individual human's horoscope. If it were graphically possible and practical we would place the symbols of Sun (as ruler of Leo), Moon, and planets as well as those of the lunar nodes and Part of Fortune at the appropriate points on the circumference of the completed wheel; the circumference is, of course, the complete emanation of the Ascendant-radius. The picturing of the aspects made by the planetary points would be shown by straight lines from the central circle to the points on the radius which give the astronomical positions for that time and place. The angle made by any two of these lines indicates by numerical degree the aspect created by the two planetary points in relationship to each other. Every aspect in a horoscope-- as a "thing in itself"--has polarity in the two bodies with are so related to each other and polarity--however or wherever--is the ignition of consciousness. The person, from his center of consciousness as a human being, has evolved certain inter-relationships between the factors of his human consciousness. These are "aspects"--call them, or think of them as "view- points;" he looks out from the center of his chart (this central awareness) into the conditions of his chart, into the conditions of his environment, his relationships, his activities, his weaknesses and deficiencies, his aspirations, his ideals, and his relative fulfillments. Every one of these points on the circumference of the wheel has correspondence to a color which may appear in his aura and every aspect between the pairs of planets in his chart-pattern will correspond--basically--to a quality of his auric color, or colors. The whiteness of a human horoscope is represented not by the contents of the wheel (because the wheel-contents refer to him, or describe him, as a personality evolving the consciousness of truth), but by the whiteness in the central circle of the wheel--the central Sun-symbol. If the factors of the chart were to be indicated in color-shades, this central circle would be kept white--because it is the omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent Spirit. Black is indicated in the human horoscope only by the central dot, nowhere else--and as such it symbolizes the infinitude, the measureless and incomprehensible subjectivity of life itself, from which all creative Logoi and their manifestations are derived. Nowhere in a horoscope is "badness" (or black in the sense of absolute evil) indicated. The "viewpoints" we call "square" and "opposition" aspects are patterns indicative of tension, inharmony, ignorance, or congestion of whatever kind, but they are still registrations of the soul-body of the human; the points which make up each such aspect are divine powers as differentiated by the evolving human consciousness. Out of the Black of Chaos, the White of Creative Consciousness establishes a field of evolution and that evolutionary program is what each horoscope reveals. It is through the purification of the auric Colors (regeneration of "aspects and viewpoints") that the realization of identity with the White of Divinity is finally made. 

Chapter VI
Light As Therapy

The word therapy is derived from a Greek word meaning "healing." The verb "to heal" is derived from a Teutonic word which means, among other things, "to reconcile." "Reconcile" comes directly from the Latin root-words "re" (again) and "con" (with)--together these indicate to reunite. Therapy is thus seen to mean more than "a process of fixing up a part of the body." It means "to reunite harmoniously the affected part with the rest of the organism." All therapy serves the purpose of re-establishing the consciousness of physical, mental, psychological, or spiritual unification. Christ Jesus said, "My Father and I are ONE," "Be ye perfect even as your Father in Heaven is perfect," and "Love ye one another." In these and other similar statements is found the declaration of the unity of each with all and of all with the one--the health, harmony, and beauty of unity in diversity. If the word "health" is understood to mean the vital and harmonious functioning of the parts of the physical, emotional, and mental bodies then the consciousness of love is the health of human relationships, for it is in the consciousness of Love that the fulfillment of experience is made and relationships are the agencies of experience.

The urge to realize or to recognize (re-cognize--to know again) unity is nowhere better illustrated than in those activities which characterize healing. If disease, malformation, and abnormality were characteristics of truth-full human being-ness, these conditions would be accepted and endured without attempts made to correct them. In fact, with such an attitude, it would never occur to anyone to try to correct them. But Man, who is of the one spirit of his Creator, seeks to realize the unity which is his true state. That unity is objectified as, or reflected in, the harmonious inter-relation of all of his parts with each other. The "search for health" is the striving, in consciousness, to recognize and realize the White Light of unity.

There seems to be so wide a divergence, in "style," between the work of the spiritually-minded astrologer and that of the therapist. The former studies an abstract diagram on a piece of paper and the latter studies the living, breathing human body. Their respective "materials of study" are poles apart but it is of paramount importance for astrological students to realize that these two methods of human study are fraternal--the astrologer and the therapist are "spiritual brothers." Both must exercise the faculty of analysis, of symbols or of bodily parts and faculties, which is the basis of diagnostic art. Both of these "brothers" must know the individualized significance of each symbol or of each bodily part and that knowledge is distilled by focused, specialized study. In the experience of the astrologer, the concentrated exercise of intuition, through meditation, is also a most important factor. That which represents essential knowledge gained by analysis is that of the inherent perfection of the individualized part and of the significance of the relationship of the perfection of the part to the inherent perfection of the whole--horoscope or body. Thus it is seen that the work of analysis is counterparted and completed by the work of synthesis. Synthesis, in this respect, may be thought of as being that form of study by which true knowledge of microcosms--astrological factors or bodily parts--is correlated to true knowledge of the macrocosm--the entire horoscope or the entire composite of the physical, emotional, and mental bodies. Both of these forms of inquiry contain the same kind of exercise of consciousness. "Exercise of consciousness" means "using the powers of light" (as sensory perception to acquire factual knowledge through observation and study), and "using the powers of Light" (intuitive and spiritualized realization of Truth and motivations of dedicated service to human betterment and enlightenment). Health is, as one way of manifesting and identifying the unity of spirit. Healing, by whatever means--objective therapy or educational enlightenment--is an action by which consciousness of health is intensified. This, in essence, comprises the service of both the astrologer and the therapist.

Astrology is, first and foremost, a study in symbols of the evolving consciousness of humanity. Therefore, the astrological reader who aspires to fulfill a service of therapy must acquaint himself with the subject of epigenesis. This word, derived from two Greek root-words, means "to build upon." In its occult or esoteric application, it refers to the faculty of humans to build the quality of their vehicles upon the quality of their consciousness. "As a man thinketh, so is he" depicts this faculty, which is the one creative faculty expressed by all humans from the start of their evolutionary unfoldment. From incarnation to incarnation, on the spiral of unfoldments of consciousness, human vehicles are formulated on the etheric planes, as matrices of the physical, by conditioning of the individual consciousness and karmic necessity. Since no human can use consciousness for another--in the absolute sense--this means that we, individually, determine the future quality of vehicles by present exercise of consciousness. Since we tend, subconsciously or instinctively, to identify ourselves and other people as "bodies," let us consider a horoscope as being a picture of a body: The circle may then be taken to represent the enclosure of skin, the "outside of the physical body;" the planetary points are the vital organs, centers of perception, and all other bodily contents. All human bodies are dense expressions of one structural plan or idea and though a human may appear at birth to be without some factor of sense-perception or organic structure and function, it is important to recognize that all human horoscopes have the same number and kind of symbolic factors. Lacking a bodily member or sense-organ throughout an entire incarnation does not deprive any human from his full quotient of horoscopical factors.

Correspondingly, if, during the course of the incarnation, the person experiences a severance of a bodily part or cessation of a sense-perception, his horoscope still remains entire--he does not have a planet or sign taken away. This means that, as a living and functioning human, his potentials remain intact. Vehicular deficiency from birth or through incident during the incarnation outpictures a temporary obscuration of consciousness, in a specialized way, of potentials. To experience chronic or incidental physical lack is the karmic result of having expressed consciousness in some way in the past that contributed to another's lack, or limitation. In so doing, the perpetrator of the act identified himself with obscuration with the inevitable result that he, fully to explore that factor, must experience the obscuration in incarnated experience. If the will to survive and develop is sufficiently strong, the person will make intensified effort to compensate for the bodily deficiency; the evolved soul will seek to understand the causation of his deficiency in addition to his efforts to perpetuate physical survival. It is the latter type of humans for whom the astrologer may most satisfactorily act as a therapist because in the study of the horoscope as a registration of consciousness he may help the afflicted person to understand how he may regenerate his patterns of consciousness, mind, and emotion.

The path of "astro-therapy" is probably the longest path that can be walked by an astrologer because every step taken on it must first be realized in the astrologer's own consciousness. As "beauty is in the eye of the beholder," so the ideality of health must be established, degree on degree, in the mind, emotion, and awareness of the astrological interpreter. The astrologer who, through whatever fixity or congestion of attitude, is unwilling to undertake programs of internal regeneration might just as well direct his energies and attention to some other branch of the subject because he will be stopped on this path almost as soon as he is started. The desire to help another to realize more health (unfold a greater realization of health- full being) can be fulfilled only to the degree that the astrologer charges his own consciousness with more health-full-ness in the form of experienced regeneration and the subsequent realizations of spiritual truths conveyed by the symbolism of the horoscope which he studies. The proof of his desire is attested in the degree with which he seeks more clearly to understand the causations behind the "unhealthy evidences" in his own chart. If he cannot "face his own karmic causations," how can he possibly perceive those of another person? The will to truth is the basic Light which must be turned on his own chart; with that application, in sincere motivation and idealism, he qualifies to help others. Technical material on astro- diagnosis--the correlation of symbols with bodily parts and conditions--must be learned first. Astro-therapy starts when the astrologer teaches the client how he must start using his consciousness in specialized regenerative ways to decrystallize and transmute the "obscurations" shown in the chart. The astrologer, for himself or for another person, uses astro-therapy when he starts to realize the following, which are offered as a few basic suggestions:

THE SUN: realization that the consciousness of power must be attended by right use and application of Power; Power is for good use, not for egotistical gratification; the urge to survive is not a competitive fight with other humans--it is the aspiration to realize life's unity and eternity; the Sun symbolizes the consciousness of health through self-mastery.

THE MOON: realize the significance and importance of the mechanism of the instinctual mind as the store-house of memories from past lives; fears, tensions, and hatreds stimulated by reaction to domestic, parental, national, and racial relationships may be harmonized and transmuted by (1) clearer understanding of the laws of karmic magnetic attraction and (2) stopping the expression of fears and tensions in those relationships and substituting more co-operative, constructive, loving, friendly and wisely appreciative attitudes.

MERCURY: stop using the (great) power of the spoken and written word as a vehicle for expressing destructive criticism, malice, untruth, and prejudice; start using the transmuted powers of clear, unbiased thinking to evaluate more truthfully, to express encouragement and constructive judgment, to open the mind in willingness to learn and to consider helpful suggestions; respond with enthusiasm and joy to opportunities to learn and to understand; it is your prerogative to train your mind in any way you desire and to use it to realize truths; it is also your right to know that only you can put your consciousness--with its darkness or its light--into words, and if you desire to realize a higher degree of mental health you can do so by using the power of the word to express that which is true and loving.

VENUS: you do not have to be indolent, lazy, and negatively passive; you have resources of energy for use and you can learn to express those energies in ways that make life more beautiful and inspiring; you can develop your sense of the beautiful by disciplining your emotional responses in such a way that your expressions of consciousness contribute to the harmonization of your relationships with other humans; you can become more co-operative with, and appreciative of, other people and will automatically yearn to do so when you let your consciousness become more aware of the good and the beauty which they represent.

MARS: When the energy represented by this symbol is used to add potency and effectiveness to constructive and regenerative endeavors, cruelty, malice, fearful retaliations, and other such impulses are diminished; the physical organism retains its magnetic and vital qualities through constructively motivated conservation and with such internal discipline, the realizations of capacities, self-confidence, and worth-while goals are unfolded.

SATURN: the tendencies toward crystallization and devitalization are counteracted when the consciousness of joyous and loving fulfillment of legitimate responsibilities takes the place of the attitude of burdensomeness. In the individual horoscope, Saturn indicates--by its position and aspects--a point of much-needed balancing through additional fulfillment; the unbalance implied has its resource in neglect and unfulfillment of a past life in that particular department of experience. The therapeutic value of Saturn lies in the consciousness of the immutable justice of spiritual and evolutionary law; guilt and remorse complexes, with their corresponding corrosive and crystallizing effects on the body, can be released through recognition that now is the time to do what is right, and in so doing the karmic obligation is fulfilled in the consciousness of healthy and reasonable attitudes.

JUPITER: like that of Mars, this stands for a type of energy that needs control and discipline; in its negative implications it is the symbol of greed and false compensation; sincerity of motive, word, and deed is the spiritualization of consciousness represented by Jupiter because the power of the sincere mind and heart is the counteractive to internal falseness which prompts the development of greeds and distorted compensations. Jupiter symbolizes man's realization of truth and aspiration to unfold true judgments. In consciousness, the nobility of true sincerity must supplant the illusionary nobility of false pretense, aggrandizement, and affluence.

NEPTUNE AND URANUS: the symbols of super-sensory perceptions and of transcendent areas of consciousness; Neptune is the spiritual power of faith, Uranus is that of impersonal love; Neptune is the power to visualize internally and to idealize--the person who has faith in the existence of health can visualize it for himself. Uranus is the urge to liberation and he who would free himself from constricting conditions must contribute lovingly to the liberation of others. Use these interpretations as "food for thought" and know that they are only a few examples that illustrate the "therapy of human consciousness by the power of Light." 

Chapter VII
Light As Communication

From an esoteric standpoint, as we usually use the word, "communicate" means a process by which knowledge or information is transmitted from one mind to another. However, a study and synthesis of its derivative roots reveals its esoteric meaning which makes it possible for us more truthfully to understand the real significance and right use of this function of sensory, intellectual, and spiritual transmission. Its direct derivation is from the Latin word communicare which means to share. In it are found two basic root-words: "com" referring to "with" or "together," and "un" referring to "one-ness" or "unity." Thus we see that "communication" is a means by which diversity of minds and consciousness are, in degree, unified through the process of sharing. This sharing is a polarized process: the positive pole is revealed in actions of radiation, expressing, informing, telling, writing, projective telepathy, and inspirational projection; the negative pole is revealed in actions of perception, reaction to vibratory stimuli, all sense-perception, learning, understanding, and realization. All that is established in divine mind can be transmitted to--or shared with--diversified, individualized mind or consciousness. The over-all evolutionary goal is the realized unity of diversified minds with the One Mind of our Creator.

Before undertaking a consideration of the occult, karmic, and evolutionary significances of communication between humans, we must first consider the basic or primordial or absolute communication between Divine Consciousness and human consciousness--the "creative sharing of Light." Divine Mind makes Itself known to us--"speaks to us"--by manifesting Itself as infinitely varying states of objectified vibration--the natural, physical world. It has also creatively provided us with centers and organs of sense-perception in the development and exercise of which we may learn of our source by observation of manifestation. Through sight, we perceive and know God's manifestation as color; through hearing, we perceive and know God's manifestation as tone; through touch, we perceive and know God's manifestation as texture and density; through taste, we perceive and know God's manifestation as chemical mixture; through smell, we perceive and know God's manifestation as invisible and silent chemical emanation or radiation. Extended, "transcendental" forms of sense-perception are included in clairvoyance, intuition, clairaudience, claircognition, telepathy, and inspiration. By these faculties, Man's internal apperceptions are revealed in realms that transcend the "limitations of Time-Space." All of these sensory and super-sensory faculties and powers make possible the many variations of communicative action and rapport between the Divine and Its sub-human, human, and super-human microcosms as well as between humans amongst each other and their sub-human and super-human "brothers and sisters." He who knows more (has evolved more conscious-ness) shares with him who knows less (is less evolved in consciousness and knowledge); he who knows less (is less evolved in consciousness and knowledge) receives from, and learns from, him who knows more and is more evolved in consciousness. The magnetic attraction of relative differences in consciousness and similarity of cosmic urge to realize unity is the communicative relationship between all living things. Communication is fraternity in action; Truth-full, constructive, and serviceable communication is fraternal love in action. Now, to astrology:

Before a human can express to another mind in a communicative way, he must go through a "process inside himself" by which he formulates that which he desires to convey. In a subtle but imperishable way, this formulation is an inter-action of the subconscious mind with the conscious perceptions. Before any fact or realization can be conveyed, it has first to be learned and the particular faculty for learning was exercised prior to the present moment. It is the subconscious mind--symbolized astrologically by the Moon-which acts as the storehouse of memories--which are residual impressions established by past exercises of consciousness. It is the conscious mind--symbolized astrologically by Mercury--which cognizes and expresses according to the present need. By the adhesive, retentive quality of the subconscious mind, Man remains linked to that which he has been and has expressed in the past and his cognitions and interpretations of his present are established on what he recalls as memory or feeling-memory of his past. Therefore, we see that an individual always communicates within himself before he transmits or expresses his consciousness to another. A simple example: someone asks you what time it is--he needs that factor of information; before you can answer him, you have to "receive communication--by visual means--from what your watch tells you." Formulating a cognition, you are then able to transmit that fact as a communicative action to the other person. But, even before that, you had to learn how to read a watch to tell time; your subconscious mind retained memory of your having learned to read the watch from some time in the past. So--you "drew on your past" to fulfill the present communicative need for your friend. And so it goes, eternally: the past is the "pabulum" upon which the present draws to build the future. In the individual horoscope, the correlation of Moon and Mercury shows the alchemical "mixture" of feeling-memory, established by exercises of consciousness in the past, with perception by sense and intellect being exercised by the consciousness in the present. Also, the correlation of Moon-Mercury with Jupiter shows the alchemical process by which the individual is distilling apperception of truth--a cognition of fact which is above, and cleared from, all personal subconscious biases of interpretation by pain, pleasure, prejudice, antipathy, or favoritism. The correlation of Moon-Mercury with Uranus shows the alchemical evolution of such faculties as intuition and prevision; with Neptune, it shows the "gestation" of clairvoyant and clairaudient faculties (the evidence of things unseen and unheard) as well as the evolutionary establishment of the power of faith and the power to communicate by prayer.

The foregoing must be understood to be a general basic survey of the nature of communication. Now, for practical astro-psychological purposes, we will concentrate on the basic arch-symbol of communication and communicative faculty--the planet Mercury, ruler of Gemini and Virgo.

Create a copy of the "Gemini mandala:" the zodiacal sequence placed around a circle with Gemini as Ascendant-sign. Note that Taurus-Scorpio, the diameter of desire-power and generative power, forms the diameter of the twelfth and sixth cusps. Taurus refers to the throat-center, the mechanism by which vocal creatures create tone; remember that everything which we hear is perceived as an aspect of tonal vibration. Scorpio refers to that faculty for generating, or "evoking," material for another physical body. Through Taurus, we generate or "evoke" tonal material for the embodiment, the perceptible manifestation, of ideas, thoughts, feelings, emotions, knowledge, understanding, and realization; on the plane of physical sense-perception it is the power and faculty to generate tone that "overshadows" (twelfth house relationship to Ascendant) all communicative action. It is the Mercury-power to formulate tones as spoken words or sung words by the interaction of breath from the lungs and the mobility of tongue and lips; it is also the Mercury-power to use the hands to write and draw symbolic picture-imitations of the spoken word as written words or diagrams, and of tones as musical notation. In the Gemini mandala the Moon- sign, Cancer, is on the second cusp. Herein is seen that Man's consciousness of nationality "stewards" the evolution of his faculty to express and communicate by language. crystallized adherence to one nationality provokes limited knowledge and use of systematized language-- such a person can communicate, in speech and writing (or reading) only with those who know his particular language. But on the plane of present use of the intellect, that adherence can be decrystallized by the learning of another language, or of other languages. By such decrystallizing extension, the person can communicate with a correspondingly greater number of people, his "field of human rapport" is enlarged, his appreciation of the thought and way-of-life of others is deepened and, consequently, on the plane of spiritual recognitions he finds himself experiencing a greater degree of at-one- ment with other humans. The differences of languages provide communicative barriers only to those who do not step out of the crystallizing adherences to one language; to those who do "step out," the barriers disintegrate in degree. In this we see, again, a concrete illustration of the fact that communication is fraternity expressed; to the degree that more and more means of communication are learned will the spiritualization of fraternal rapport and sympathy be realized, enjoyed, and expressed.

In this age which witnesses the appearance of radio, television, supersonic aircraft, and all such mechanisms by which the limitations of time-space are being scientifically transcended, a parallel is seen in the field of human spiritual endeavors. Many people, of all nations around the world, are also seeking to explore the causations of impediments in individual human functioning. These are people who are giving a powerful regenerative impetus to human evolution by dedicated service to humane measures, redeeming much negative karma built in their individual past lives and devoting themselves to "helping other people to help themselves" out of states of karmic abnormality, subnormality, and deflection from normal healthy functions. In keeping with this subject of communication, it is hoped that the following observations will serve to further a deeper "inner" understanding of the karmic causations which undermine communicative faculties in the human body; the first point to be considered is epigenesis:

Epigenesis refers to the faculty of the human to build the quality of his vehicle in correspondence to the quality and states of his consciousness. ("Epi-gene-sis" comes from two root-words which mean "to build upon.") It is the one creative faculty possessed and--unconsciously or consciously--exercised by all humans from the dawn of their evolutionary procedure as humans. By epigenesis, Man reveals his creative likeness to his own Creator; it is the "root" which underlies the flowering, in ages to come, of his true creative activity as God-consciousness. The principle, or law, of cause and effect operating on the faculty of epigenesis in humans explains all conditioned quality of physical, emotional, and mental manifestation in the human vehicle--congested, deflected, crippled, or harmonized, potent, and efficient. In the present consideration of communicative faculty and purpose, we find that the Gemini mandala has much to tell us about the karmic causation of speech defects and impediments which register in the bodies of humans at birth or which "appear" during the incarnation as a result of a congested vibratory potential being stimulated by the action of timing. Such conditions as congenital muteness, cleft palate, abnormally thick tongue, stuttering and stammering, traumatic conditions which injure the vocal mechanism, tongue or lips, etc., are the principal ones which outwardly reveal that the afflicted persons caused communication to be impeded in the past. The subconscious retained memory of the destructive or congestive action influences, and the present physical body reproduces, by epigenesis, the negative potential as "karmic return" so that the person may explore the negative aspect of consciousness from "the other side of the fence" and so learn a little more about the truths of communicative faculty and their right usage for future development and evolution. Many, many kinds of action and influence in the past may cause communicative defect in the present life, but the Gemini mandala gives us the basic occult clues to the causation of most of these defective conditions--and painful experiences:

The position of the Taurus-Scorpio diameter, coinciding as it does with the cusps of the twelfth and sixth houses, is the first point to consider. This is the diameter of consciousness of power as "desire" or, to put it another way, the individualized consciousness of desire. Keeping in mind that desire is a potency of consciousness that can range, in quality, from the most inhumane lusts, greeds and retaliations to the most sublime forms of spiritualized aspirations, we realize that the right use of this potency--as shown in this mandala-- is a form of contributive service (Scorpio on cusp of sixth house) and a builder of the consciousness of health. One such example is the expression of mutual love through exercise of the sexual mechanism; another is the disciplined conservation of vital and magnetic energies for use in constructive endeavors and work. So much for Scorpio at the sixth cusp; its higher polarization in the physical is the opposite sign Taurus, at the twelfth cusp of this mandala, which is the symbol of the creativity of tones released through the spoken word--the audible embodiment of feelings, thoughts, ideas, opinions, and realizations.

Think about this: one small word--a "yes" or a "no"--spoken in a certain tone of voice, communicating to another a specific decision or feeling or realization or recognition, can change the course of a human life if the person to whom the communication is made reacts to what he hears in the word. One small word, pronounced as a judgment to affect another's life or destiny, may be spoken in such a way that the subconscious mind of the speaker "grasps and holds" an impression of malice or destructiveness to so strong a degree that the karmic return from that expression may objectify in painful experience several lives later. Through fear a needed word may be withheld; the power inherent in the unspoken word will be retained as a potential for blockage at a later time; the content of pain attending the needed subsequent decrystallization will be proportionate to the good that could have resulted if the original good word had been spoken.

In order to unfold realizations or cognitions of karmic causes to communication difficulties or impediments, we have to be willing to elasticize our viewpoint and recognize that causation of these effects, manifested in the present by epigenesis, may have been long established in the sufferer's subconscious. To use the creative power of the spoken word to give channeling to forces of destructive and untruthful consciousness is to insure future experience with communicative impediment. In much repetition of extreme forms, the mental vehicle is disintegrated to a degree and in such wise that conditions identified as "imbecility" and "idiocy" result as karmic return, especially when deliberate cruelty has been the original emotional motivation. The present experience of many such sufferers is being helped by the power of love expressed in the care and consideration given by those who are seeking to assist them--and this love is also a karmic return, established from actions of good intent and kindliness in the past. So, in these times, we see--by observation of the fact that humans are seeking to help and rehabilitate even the most tragic cases of darkness, impediment, and relative disintegration--that the only barriers to communication are those which man himself sets up; the Creator has endowed us with potentials of mind and spirit and faculty to insure our eventual communicativeness with all planes of life. In the universal or absolute sense, there are no barriers to communication. All individualized minds function under law and by releasement and refinement of potentials within the inclusive scope of the one mind--which is the one light, the one consciousness--the ever-unfolding lines of communication of "each with all and of all with the One" are perpetually and perfectly held. By the right usages of our Mercury-factors, we reproduce the ever-open-ness of our lines of communication with fellow-humans on this plane. 

Chapter VIII
Light As Affluence

The word "affluence" is derived from two Latin words: "ad," meaning "to" or "toward," and "fluere" meaning "to flow." We usually use it to refer to conditions that are characterized by abundance, bountifulness, plentifulness of supply and wealth, but a consideration of the derivation of the word gives us the clue to its esoteric meaning. It is basically not a description of conditions but a quality of consciousness by which abundance is realized and manifested. In other words, the human consciousness--the "light by which a human perceives Light"--contains a potential of functioning "affluently" so that, correspondingly, conditions of abundance may flow toward and into human environments and affairs. As the desire to realize health is one of humanity's many endeavors to perceive Light, so is the desire to realize affluence; it is important to consider how a human being can generate the kind of consciousness that makes abundance evident in his life.

If the consciousness of "hunger" is indicative of deeply-felt need, then "poverty" is a combination of that need with a conviction that the need can not, will not, or must not be fulfilled. Poverty is the opposite of affluence--it represents a "cut off" condition of consciousness that is represented outwardly by deficiency or relative lack of essential or desired things. We do not feel "poor" in not having something to which we feel indifferent; to "feel poor" is to feel deprived of that for which we have a strong feeling of desire or requirement. The poverty-complex is a form of mind-pattern, of congested quality, by which a human deprives himself of the realizations of affluence; this deprivation is a conviction of lack which characterizes his living generally or manifests in some specific factor or area of his life. The poverty-complex is always a karmic return from abuses or misuses of means and opportunities in past lives. It is essentially constructed on residual fear or guilt brought over--as reaction in the subconscious--from past actions characterized by wastefulness, destructiveness, dishonesty, or dishonor. By wastefulness we undermine our consciousness of right use; by destructiveness we set up a power of repulsion in the subconscious which "negates" our desire to attract that which we now want or require; by dishonesty or dishonor we deprive others of what is rightfully theirs and the subconscious residue, now registering as the poverty-complex, is the enervating and "lifeless" essence of fear and guilt. Whether of short or long duration, the "feeling of poverty" is always an indication, delivered up to the conscious mind by reaction from the subconscious, that a drastic revision of consciousness is required. That revision must be established in the subconscious mind before the improved conditions will appear in outer affairs. In other words, the person's feeling about life and himself must be changed by a process of "openingness" so that he, by expression of his consciousness, can "flow more freely into life" and so that the manifestations of life's abundance can "flow more freely into his affairs." Water is perhaps the most perfect symbol of the principle of life's affluence; remember that it must be released from its states of suspension as cloud, snow, and ice before it can life-givingly flow forth as rivers. It is the power of warmth that releases the water-potentials from their static state as ice and snow; correspondingly, some form of spiritual warmth must be established in the human's subconscious as a means of revitalizing his outlook on himself and his conditions. How is this renewing establishment made? Let us consider what the Great Astrological Mandala (the twelve-housed circle surrounded by the zodiacal belt with Aries as Ascendant-sign) has to tell us:

Look first at the two signs which focalize the two arms of the vertical diameter: Cancer, cardinal water, is at the lower end; Capricorn, cardinal earth, is at the upper end; the total vertical line is the line of generation or parentage. The Moon, ruler of Cancer, is the archetypal mother-symbol; Saturn, ruler of Capricorn, is the archetypal father-symbol. Esoterically, these two signs, and the line which they form as "emanation" from the center of the wheel, refer to the attribute of a human being to generate his own destiny by the way he exercises his consciousness, from incarnation to incarnation. Man qualifies the evolutionary line of his existence by what he establishes in his subconscious mind (Cancer) and by the ways in which he outpictures these establishments (Capricorn). By his participation in the creative power of thought, each human is the mother and father of the quality of his own evolutionary line. By his powers of reaction in feeling, he is made aware of what he has established in his subconscious mind; by his powers of expression (thought, word, and >deed), he gives embodiment to that which he has established in his subconscious realms. The "conviction of poverty" is a "darkness in the subconscious"---it means that the person, in the past, has identified himself with deprivation by some kind of action representing misuse and/or abuse of opportunities and means. In short, by his defaults in these matters, he "parented" the present condition or situation which he "identities as poverty." Poverty is not a reality of life, it is an individual interpretation of conditions based karmic reaction. Think a moment: Is life "poverty-stricken?" Is our planet "poverty- stricken"? Does every human have the same kind of poverty-complex as every other human? Does everyone have to suffer from the poverty- complex eternally? The answer to all of these inquiries is no. Let us now consider a very important and interesting esoteric astrological clue to the means by which the poverty-complex may be decrystallized so that the locked-up energies may be released affluent-ly:

This clue is found in the planetary exaltations--soulic powers of spiritual apperception distilled from conscious regeneration in past lives--as they are pictured in the Great Astrological Mandala: Jupiter, ruler of Sagittarius, exalted in Cancer; Moon, ruler of Cancer, exalted in Taurus; Venus, the principle of Equilibrium- through-exchange, rules Taurus and Libra; Saturn, ruler of Capricorn, exalted in Libra; Mars, ruler of Aries, exalted in Capricorn. First, Jupiter exalted in Cancer, as the apperception of the power of "givingness:"

If we desire to overcome a poverty-complex we have to signify our sincerity on that point by doing something of an affluent nature to manifest the desired condition in human experience. That form of expression is what we call "giving." The statement "it is more blessed to give than to receive" is much more than an "old saw." It contains a profound metaphysical and occult directive: the act of giving is a blessing to the subconscious mind of the one who gives. If you are convinced, in your congested subconscious, that a desired or required state is "not for you" but you do something to make possible another person's realization of that thing, you take the first and most important step in decrystallizing your own poverty-complex. If your poverty-complex were "total," you would not even think of trying to make that particular thing evident to another person. The fact that you do give of that thing impresses the subconscious mind that you are aware of the thing's availability. With that action, performed in sincere helpfulness of motive, you begin to release the locked-up subconscious energies because giving is affluence in action. You have thereby opened yourself to the possibilities of realizing the desired or required thing in your own affairs and environment. Consequently, the result is that you have established more light in your subconscious mind and that establishment, from then on, becomes a magnet to attract those things consistent with your desire or requirement. With the en-lightened feeling, resulting from the "loosening" provided by your out-giving action and more out-giving consciousness, the exaltation of Mars in Capricorn makes you more aware of what you must do, as personal discipline and development, to make that improved establishment a "permanent fixture" of your soul-consciousness. In other words the new opening-up leads you onto a new path of spiritualizing endeavor which has as its goal the integrated establishment, for permanent use, of the new spiritual realization. One act of sincere and helpful giving-ness starts the affluent process; but exalted Mars--persistent constructive effort--has to be applied so that the poverty-complex of many years' standing may be completely dissolved and the energies pertaining to it may be completely translated into consciousness of Light. That means that more self-honesty may have to be realized; courage and self-confidence may have to be developed; more consistent and thorough application may have to be applied to current conditions and endeavors; all tendencies or inclinations to hold others--mentally, emotionally, or physically--in any kind of undue bondage may have to be relinquished. Remember, you want freedom from your poverty-complex so you must give others the gift of freedom; in order to do that you may have to let go of certain kinds of fear but fearlessness is, itself, an attribute of affluence. How could water flow if it were afraid of moving, or if ice and snow were afraid to melt? We have to be willing to melt and dissolve the secret congestions if we are to realize the consciousness--and evidences--of affluence. The powers of Truth, Courage, Faith, Love, Joy, and Freedom are the "thermal qualities" by which the Spirit melts the paralyzing constrictions established by the "personal ego" in its expression of unregenerate interpretations.

If financial abundance is your desired and/or required symbol of affluence, then the two points which are exalted in Venus-signs give us some clues. The person who exercises disorganized and chaotic stewardship of present materials--no matter how much money he has- -is operating away from affluence because this kind of functioning is concrete evidence of weaknesses at work. The Moon's exaltation in Taurus--the second house sign--might be said to convey the keyword: I establish affluence by right stewardship--now. In the home, in business establishments, in professional activities, or commercial matters, humans cannot establish disorder in patterns of financial exchange and expect to continue to register affluence. We impose burdens on others if we perpetrate disorder in our affairs and, sooner or later, we have to rectify the unbalance. The sign Taurus is polarized by the fixed water-sign Scorpio which refers to consciousness of sex. It has become an established fact, through psychological and metaphysical inquiry, that the consciousness of money is counterparted by the consciousness of sex. Both are aspects of desire for maintenance and perpetuation. It has been determined that congestions in the attitudes toward sex and/or money have a retroactive effect on the opposite. In these days of "evolutionary speeding up," humans are given the opportunities to resolve much karma from many past lives and sex and money have been the desires which have prompted much negative expression in our past experiences.

Consider this in the light of the programs of heavy taxation we are now dealing with. Also, in the light of what is being revealed in these times regarding the sexual aspects of human nature--the karmic conditions of the generative consciousness which are being revealed in so many complex forms. Therefore, a man's "poverty-laden consciousness of money" could well be found to have its roots in psychogenetic conditions of a constrictive kind and these conditions all require more charging by the consciousness of love and/or good will toward other humans. Saturn, ruler of Capricorn, is exalted in Libra, the seventh house-sign of the Great Mandala. This is the insignia, in a simple astrological way, of the Golden Rule--the perfect fulfillment of experience through harmonized consciousness of human relationship and the consciousness of spiritual justice which that form of realization includes. Affluence is the provide-ance of Life for our sustainment. That "providance" is already established for our use but if anything in our consciousness seeks to deprive another of what is his rightful fulfillment, then we cut off our recognition of Life's affluence; we limit our expression of affluence; and poverty sets in.

The traditional symbol of the Sun--the point circumscribed by a circle--may well be taken, for this consideration, as the symbol of all affluent potentials, the symbol of Life's entire provide-ance. From what it represents, all things necessary for our evolution are emanated--just as everything pictured in a horoscope is "emanated" from the central point. The Sun, as ruler of the fire-sign Leo, may then be taken as the symbol of the affluence of spiritual light--all Love, all Wisdom, all Truth, all Beauty, all Ideation which humans can realize and, as well, all material representations which we interpret from spiritualized consciousness. Power in all possible degrees is represented by the Sun and, thus, it represents every possible degree of power which a human may realize. Power is--it is part of our "life-job" to unfold recognition of it in ourselves.

Since poverty is an illusion created by the relatively unevolved human consciousness, it is not strictly true, from a philosophical standpoint, that "Saturn is the symbol of poverty." Such an interpretation does Saturn an injustice. Saturn speaks to us, through our fears and guilts, of the unfulfilled areas of our experience; when these areas are fulfilled, security is established in consciousness and consequently that form of inner ease which generates affluence is brought about. Also, the square aspects in the individual chart represent areas of inner tension and each of these can be interpreted as a "poverty-potential." Alchemical regeneration by expressing the spiritual attributes of the planetary points involved will "melt the ice" of the inner congestion. The person who suffers from a sense of "poverty of education" must first heal his subconscious mind by re-charging it with a strong desire to learn; the desire to learn is the desire to experience affluence on the mental plane and this form of affluence can only be experienced when the mind is allowed to open. Tendencies to prejudice, dogmatism, opinionatedness, and mental tyranny must be loosened and the humility of a true learner must be established in the subconscious. If schooling, per se, is not available then the true learner will open his mind to the awareness of other channels of study and learning: libraries, bookstores, public lectures are abundantly available for all in these times. If specific schooling is the desired thing, then the person will have to indicate his sincere desire by being willing to organize his life and affairs for the realization of the goal. People can learn much by the inexpensive method of becoming more perceptive of the world around them.

The poverty of love, friendship, and companionship is, perhaps, the most tragic of all karmic congestive evidences. People who suffer from these deprivations might well give attention to the fact that love and friendship are states of consciousness-- establishing them in consciousness makes possible the affluent expression of them and the affluent realization of them in relationships. It is also important to recognize that many people who deeply yearn for relationship-joys and companionship-fulfillments are not friendly with themselves, however devoted they may possibly be to others. Respect and appreciation for one's self, as an expression of Divine Life, and one's potentials for revealing that which is good and beautiful, may have to be established in place of self-contempts, inferiority-feelings, and the like. Lack of harmony in such relationship-patterns as those with a parent or fraternal relative may have to be transformed by expanding the relationship consciousness in more universal ways. But, always, we should remember that the will to truthful understanding of others may--and can--unlock the tight areas of any human relationship. We must be affluent in our good will toward others if we would realize affluence in our experience. 

Chapter IX
Astro-Philosophy Discusses Hospital Experience

We humans are inclined to identify things in terms of the feelings we have experienced in contact, or relationship, with them. "Pain, suffering, trouble, and sorrow" are the associations we tend to make when "hospital" is brought to our attention. With such associations in mind and feeling, emphasized through the years, it is no wonder that anxiety, fear, and terror rise up in us when hospital-experience becomes imminent. We recognize and admit, from the evidence of our conditions, that we need help; we desperately want release from the inharmony and discomfort of disease and injury; but, in our limited comprehension of "hospital-truth," we tend to intensify our difficulty. We become so preoccupied with pain and fear that we anesthetize our consciousness of health and our faith in the availability of healing powers. It is true that people can release themselves from physical, emotional, and mental inharmony by an internal action, a switch in consciousness from congestion-on-inharmony to realization-of-health. These persons give living proof that healing is internal. The primordial, instinctive will-to-live is the basic healing agency for even those persons who are not aware of a conscious faith in recovery. However, the conscious intensifying of the awareness of health and healing not only hastens the correction of the particular condition but re-establishes health on all planes of functioning. All of these forms of service which might be called the "paths of healing" are, in truth, means by which humans assist other humans to diminish fear and hopelessness and to intensify their recognitions of the nature of well-being. Pisces, the twelfth house-sign of the Great Mandala, is the key.

There are two astrological mandalas, extracts from the Great Astrological Mandala (twelve-housed wheel, Aries as Ascendant-sign, thirty degrees of each zodiacal sign corresponding to each house), which may be studied in consideration of why humans have hospital-experience. The first one depicts the evolutionary causes. This is drawn by indicating the symbols of the mutable signs at the cusps of the ninth, sixth, third, and twelfth houses, the symbol for Sagittarius at the ninth cusp drawn larger than the other three, and all four cusps connected by a sequence of straight lines and the two intersecting diameters. This drawing results in the mutable square and its internal complementary lines of force. The drawing of the square should start at the Sagittarius cusp because this sign is the "fire-sign representative" of the mutable cross; as such, it symbolizes the apperception of truth. The fourth sign in clockwise sequence from Sagittarius is Pisces, representing the water-element, and the subject of this discourse. A more condensed representation of this sequence will be seen in a vertical line of the four mutable signs with Sagittarius at the bottom, Virgo next above, Gemini next above, and Pisces at the top; a vertical line at the side, with the arrow-head at the top next to Pisces will show how (because this is a "square-mandala") "default in Sagittarius leads to negative Pisces conditions;" in other words, lack of apperception of truth leads to twelfth house, Pisces, karmic condition. In terms of "square and opposition aspect-interpretation," this mandala reveals that hospitals are places of limitation, constriction, and entombment only to the consciousness which refuses the opportunities to recognize Truth; the conditions which make hospitalization necessary are always the results of having expressed un-truth in the past. But, Truth is an attribute of eternal Being; it is always available, always serviceable, and omnipotent to help. Therefore, the karmic necessity which we call "hospital- experience" can be regarded as an opportunity to perceive truth-of-being in greater degree than ever before.

If, in this mandala of the mutable square, Sagittarius represents past default on cognition and expression of Truth, then Pisces--at the top of the sequence--represents the outpicturing of that default in terms of necessity to make atonement. We make atonement by a process of refocalization of consciousness and the externalizing of this refocalization is the slowed-down experience of being incarcerated in the hospital. A hospital is a place of limitation, incarceration, sorrow, pain, and trouble only to a person who refuses to expand his consciousness of himself in relation to his experience. To a person who truly seeks truth, the hospital is a place of opportunity for re-newal. Pain-experience focalizes the great internal query of "Why?" When a person's "why?" is sincere, Truth always and inevitably recharges his consciousness and clarifies the meaning of the experience. Self-pity, unreasonable worry, and bitterness keep the person aligned to the "mutable square"--and all of its implications. The sincere desire to realize health inspires the suffering person to seek the truthful understanding of the causes of his condition.

One person's hospital-experience also provides similar opportunity to each of his loved ones who are thus given the opportunity to expand and impersonalize on the emotional and mental planes. In unthought-ful pity we emphasize the painful elements of our loved one's experience because our attention is on the pain-ful outer aspect, not on the truthful significance of the experience as an indication of opportunity for growth, harmonization, and realization. Sagittarius, as the "root" of this representation of the mutable square, states that there is an understanding of principle to be perceived in the experience; when the opportunity is resisted and resented, the incarceration-in-difficulty intensifies; when it is accepted with a dissolution of self-pity and self-justification, the inpouring of Truth not only clarifies consciousness but it also strengthens faith and deepens the capacity for pure sympathy. One then comes into clearer and more truthful understanding of the difficulties of others, and the powers of right helpfulness are expanded and re-enforced.

The path of humanity's evolution is traversed by two principal "modes." One is the mode of mysticism; this is the "Heart Path" of sympathy, inspiration, instrumentation, impersonal devotion, prayer, and dedication. It is basically symbolized by Pisces as ruler-ship sign of Neptune and exaltation-sign of Venus. The other is the mode of occultism, the radiative power and mind Path. It identifies the path of scientists, inventors, creative artists, magicians, and alchemists. All humans who serve through healing activities incline, basically, to one or the other of these modes, but both modes are essential for the identification of a Master Healer.

The mystic path of healing-activity is well illustrated by such persons as Bernadette Soubirous, through whose inspired instrumentation the Grotto of Lourdes was established; Father Flanagan, who established Boys' Town, and all persons who pray for humanity's healing also illustrate the mystic mode. Research scientists, inventors, administrators, surgeons, and dentists illustrate the occultist mode. Florence Nightingale, primarily an example of the occultist mode, was a wonderful example of the combination of both modes.

In the type of healer who most closely is associated with the correction of the patient's illness will be found an important clue as to the karma cause of the illness. The healer stands as a personalized representative of an expansion of consciousness which the patient needs to make--truly to correct the cause of his illness. The skill of a surgeon (occultist) may correct the external aspect of the condition, but the devoted and loving tenderness of the nurse (mystic) may be the power which most completely inspires the patient with renewal of his consciousness of the truth of health; a nurse who is careless, indifferent, and without sympathy may discourage the patient and increase his preoccupation with his trouble. His surgeon, however, may inspire him by his command of knowledge and skill, and this form of inspiration may stimulate in the patient a deeper- than-ever desire to know the truth of his condition. It is sincerely felt by the author that the healer-as-occultist is basically symbolized by Neptune being exalted in Leo, the Sun's sign and arch-symbol of power.

The second mandala of hospital-experience is the water-trine mandala: an equilateral triangle formed by straight line connecting the cusps of the twelfth, eighth, and fourth houses; the symbols for Pisces, Scorpio, and Cancer appropriately placed; the symbol for Pisces drawn larger than the other two sign-symbols, and the symbol for Neptune placed in the twelfth house. Prepare three of these. In the first, indicate the diameter Pisces-Virgo; in the second, indicate the diameter Scorpio-Taurus; in the third indicate the diameter Cancer- Capricorn. These mandalas illustrate the fullness of the significance of each of the water-signs to hospital-experience by application of the Principle of Polarity. The symbols for the three water-signs arranged in a vertical line with Pisces at the top, Scorpio second, and Cancer at the bottom, will clearly picture the sequence which is appropriate to this discussion.

First mandala--Pisces-Virgo: This is the diameter of consciousness of health, the depletion of which makes therapy or hospital- experience necessary. Virgo is health as the basic potency which makes serviceable activity possible; Pisces is the needed redemption of that potency. The person whose consciousness of physical potency or ability is less than its natural fullness cannot express the fullness of his serviceable activity, even though he may make heroic efforts in spite of his limitation. Those efforts, made as an expression of his will, are in effect redemption from within, but if therapy can assist to unfold expansion of ability, then the person "asks for help from Pisces"--he enters a hospital, "cuts off" from his previous activity for a time, accepts limitation of activity, and, at the same time, he accepts the opportunity more fully to improve his physical condition and his capacity for serviceable activity. The hospital-building which he enters for help and regeneration is an externalization of the overshadowing powers of divine grace. Think about this.

No one is immune from the action of the Law of Cause and Effect, but, though every individual must face and resolve his karmic residues, the powers of Divine Grace are inherent in every activity by which humans receive help in the resolution of their difficulties. The presence of Divine Grace in the human heart is evidenced by any hospital, from the small tent-ward on the field of combat to the gigantic and complex institutions of metropolitan cities; all hospitals, from smallest to largest, are continually over-shadowed and recharged by healing agencies from higher dimensions. The most inspiredly dedicated of our healers are those who are, consciously or unconsciously, most sensitive to the directive stimulus of these Higher Agencies. Humans, seeing only the surface of things, interpret hospitals as being places of pain, sorrow, and darkness. The exact opposite is true: Hospitals are focalizations of the healing powers of light and love. When suffering humanity realizes this, the whole attitude toward their necessary hospital-experience undergoes a drastic and illuminating change. Faith, gratitude, hopefulness, and reassurance neutralize the constricting effects of pain, and both consciousness and body expand to make a more efficient adjustment to healing treatments. The power of Divine Grace transforms a hospital from being a place where ripe karma of pain, sorrow, and limitation must be endured to being a place where redemption and at-one-ment may be experienced.

If the first mandala, headed by Pisces, is the "what and where" of hospital-experience, then the diameter Scorpio-Taurus indicates the means by which hospital service is carried out and fulfilled. Esoterically, Scorpio-Taurus is the diameter of stewardship, the spiritual principle which is distilled in human consciousness through experiences of "possession and ownership." That which is "stewarded" in hospital service and experience is regenerative power. It originates in higher, invisible dimensions, it is directed by Invisible Servers and channeled in each healing-institution by human servers to those in need. The Invisible Servers work dedicatedly through long spans of time to direct the focalization of power for human needs and the sign Scorpio symbolizes very clearly the dedicated consciousness and disciplined abilities of all true human healers.

Florence Nightingale, whose indefatigable labors extended through a lifetime of ninety years stands as a wonderful human example of the persistent services of Invisible Healers. Healers discipline themselves to qualify, but no healer "owns" healing power-- in his stewardship of his personal equipment he acts as a "steward" of that which is projected from Invisible Sources for use on this plane. All releasement of power is subsequent to focalization of Power; the healer who, in a balanced and harmonious way, conserves his personal resources is the one who can most effectively release the power which flows through him to his patients; these resources pertain to the physical, emotional, mental, and spiritual aspects of his being. Therefore, Scorpio- Taurus refers to the material of power which makes healing-regeneration possible through focalization and release; it refers to the Principle of Stewardship which operates through the consciousness of invisible and visible healers; it refers to the omnipresent Source of power, the provid-ance of Father-Mother God for the preservation and regeneration of evolving forms and microcosms. He who would serve as "healer," in dedicated service, "takes hands" with his Invisible Elders and serves as their incarnated "grounded" instrument.

The third representation of this mandala, emphasized by Cancer, which is polarized by Capricorn, illustrates "that" which inspires or prompts a human to walk the Path of Healing-service. It is the parental power of pure sympathy. It was once said that "the first hospital was built when a human first prayed unselfishly and in the fullness of faith for the healing of a fellow human." That form of prayer when externalized in the physical is the hospital-building which encloses, as the womb encloses the growing embryo, the expanding emergence of health-consciousness. Cancer, the maternal symbol, illustrates the qualities of sympathy, tenderness, mercy, and compassion which inspire humans to assist in the healing of others; Capricorn, the paternal symbol, illustrates the providance of organized material form for the protection and enclosure of healing-activities, corresponding to the material home which a father provides for the protection of his young. "Embryo in the womb" and "patient in the hospital" correspond to each other in the sense that each is having the opportunity to unfold anew his life- consciousness through experience.

The relation of hospital-administrators and servers to patients has many points of similarity to the relation of parents to their children. All therapists are "parents" to their patients' renewal of Life-consciousness through their activities in health-improvement, and health- improvement is always an agency of liberation. He who would liberate himself from the causes of physical inharmony must renew, regenerate, and revitalize his consciousness; he who would most truly serve on the path of healing must add to his technical knowledge and skill by learning of the importance of helping others to regenerate their consciousness. Healing is a spirit-ual thing; those who heal most truly are those who serve to reveal the omnipotence, omnipresence, and omniscience of the Indwelling Spirit. Prayer is the "technique" for this revealment; prayer and skill-knowledge unify the mystic-occultist powers in the healer. Sympathy, humility, dedication to factual and spiritual truth, balanced personal discipline, and faith make it possible for each healer to "ground" the regenerative forces from the higher realms for use in the hospital where he or she serves.

In conclusion, these three representations of the water-trine mandala may be used to study prison experience. In their essential nature and purpose prisons are hospitals. In both, karmic residues are to be faced and resolved; the same Power and the same Agencies serve both; the prime objective of both forms of service is: atonement, and "atonement" means increased consciousness of at-one- ment, the harmonized unification of body, emotion, mind, and soul with Spirit. 

Chapter X
The Astrological Path

The purpose of presenting this discourse is two-fold. It is well that new students of astrology obtain a perspective of what this Path requires of them in mental training and what it includes in expansion of knowledge and understanding. Those students who are experienced on the Path should periodically remind themselves of the requirements of their chosen Path and refresh their spiritual aims, methods, and objectives. The Astrological Path is a long one, containing many complexities of unfoldment; the "long- range viewpoint" and quiet, unshakable patience are prime requisites for the fulfillment of any of its phases. Some students, in the present life, may be recapitulating knowledge gained through study in past lives, now ready to begin to apply their knowledge and understanding; some may still be continuing their program of absorption, and still others may be taking their first step on this Path. Regardless of present placement, all should have a comprehensive knowledge of the over-all program that is involved in this complex study so that the spiritual ideal and purpose may be held to unwaveringly.

The art-science called "astr-ology" is the study of universal laws as they apply to evolutionarily unfolding consciousness; consciousness is the one primordial light and the symbols of the "lights"--Sun, Moon, and planets--are used to designate the faculties, vehicles, and powers by which unfolding consciousness becomes aware of divine consciousness. Just as our solar system is one of seven systems comprising a galaxy so each of our "solar-system-lights" is one of a family, inter-related to and interdependent upon each other and the central sun; all being externalizations of the divine creative consciousness of our Logos. Astrology is primarily not a "study of the stars"--that is the astronomer's job. The astrologer is a student of modes of consciousness which are externalized as the planetary, solar, and lunar bodies of our system. We humans have correspondence with these planetary bodies because we and they are creations of the same Divine Source and vibratory affinity aligns us all together in this solar system. The astronomer assists the astrologer in providing scientifically calculated data pertaining to the geocentric and heliocentric relationships of the "lights" to the belt of the zodiacal signs; this data is synchronized with time-space principles of incarnation for the calculation of the natal horoscope which symbolically pictures the present cyclic status of an evolving hu1nan consciousness. The "astr" of astrology refers to "star" only exoterically; esoterically and philosophically it refers to that light which is consciousness. It is by the degree and quality of evolving consciousness that all phenomena, experience, and relationship are interpreted; this refers to the physical body as well as to all environments, activities, endeavors, karmic lessons, aspirations, and ideals. All of these factors are symbolically pictured in essence by the natal horoscope; the sum-total of the "contents" of a chart represents the person's basic inclinations and tendencies in viewpoint--the specific result of the way he exercised his inclinations and tendencies in past lives up to the present life. When the astrological student establishes his awareness of the "astro-path" as being the study of consciousness--ever evolving through incarnated experience and patterned by the great archetypal Principles of the Universe--he will then appropriately evaluate each factor of the study to the basic core and thus maintain all evaluations in proper proportion and perspective. Every factor in a correctly calculated horoscope is an exact picturing of results in consciousness from causes in consciousness. Regeneration of consciousness determines improved conditions, more truthful evaluation of experience and a clearer and more perfect apperception of powers--potential and actual.

The ancients were encouraged in their apperceptions of Divine Nature and Consciousness by the technique of "personalization;" modes and facets of the Divine Essence were given exposition as "the gods and goddesses." The anglicized versions of some of these divine names are now applied to our identity of the planets--the name of each planet representing a composite or synthesis of divine potentials, principles, and powers. So, in considering the many phases of the Astrological Path we will also personalize, for concreteness, and, in imagination, consider the nature and abilities of one whom we will call "The Master Astrologer," and whom we will identify as the prototype of all astrologers and astrological students, past, present, and future. His name will be "Astrophilus" (he who loves astrology), and he is one who, through many lives during many centuries of time has dedicated himself to the ever-expanding comprehension of astrological principles. As a Master-Astrologer, he is one who now is able to correlate all phases of learning with astrological symbolism. He will be understood to be the "personalized ideal" of all who walk the "Astro-Path."

Astrophilus always has been, is now, and will continue to be aspiritual aspirant. This means that he does not permit his desire for astrological knowledge to supersede his desire for understanding of right use of astrological knowledge. He dedicates his application of knowledge to the service of human enlightenment because he knows that the enlightenment-service is the basic purpose for the attainment of knowledge in the first place. He knows that the maximum fullness of his knowledge is but a fragment of universal wisdom so, with true humility, he keeps his mind and consciousness ever-open and ever-adjustable to the consideration of new ideas. He is as impersonal and honest in his evaluation of his own chart as he is with the chart of anyone else because he knows that only total honesty will nourish his own unfoldment and ability. His intellectual and analytical endeavors--extensive, profound, and crystalline as they may be--are continually nurtured by prayer; whenever the need is felt, he invites the recharging of his consciousness and intuition by the powers of the Super-mind. Every act or endeavor in his astrological service is dedicated and consecrated by his love for God and fellow-humans. He recognizes that he is "Elder Brother" to--probably--most of humanity, but he never forgets that he himself is as much a child of the Divine Parent as is the most ignorant and uninspired of his fellows. His calculation of each horoscope is an act of spiritual ritual by which the forces of his mind, consciousness, and Spirit are focalized and unified to the fulfillment of his service.

As a Brother, Astrophilus is sincerely appreciative of the endeavors and aspirations of humans on all paths which serve human enlightenment and regeneration. Through his many past lives he has shared the absorption of knowledge with fellow- students who represent all lines of inquiry and investigation. He maintains an essential gratefulness toward all teachers and experiences which serve to further his astrological, philosophical, and spiritual education. In finding a correlation between his chart and any experience, he appreciates the experience, however painful or difficult, because it served to expand his knowledge and understanding. He regrets and resents no experience; the healthy adjustability of his mind--dedicated to the reception of Truth-- permits no morbid retention of negative interpretations of experience but rather rejoices in each and every opportunity for the expansion of comprehension and apperception. He seeks always to avoid attitudes or viewpoints of bias and so refuses to retain in consciousness that quality of mental action that breeds prejudice or false approbation. He strives to regard his own experiences with spiritual equity so that he may more perfectly represent the equity of true enlightenment to those he helps.

As a scientist, Astrophilus is first of all a mathematician and geometrician. The technical aspects of his work require a fluent comprehension of all arithmetical principles and of certain principles revealed through geometry. Since algebra is the mathematical exposition of the universal Law of Correspondence, a knowledge of this branch of science enables Astrophilus to evaluate and tabulate any and all vibratory equations to be found in a given chart, or which form the "patterns of linkage" between two or more charts. In his training, back in the early days in Atlantis, Chaldea, and Egypt, Astrophilus learned that accuracy in mathematical calculation and comprehension not only externalized the apperception of a mode of Truth, but acceptance of the mental disciplines involved in training externalized the sincerity of his pursuit of truth. Accuracy is truth externalized; and because of the tremendous complexity of "things" which are studied on the Astrological Path, the willingness to discipline the mental body so that the right results are obtained in mathematical endeavors is an important factor in the astrologer's dedication to his service. Whenever it is possible to do so, Astrophilus always seeks to determine the accuracy of all data; he works with that data in such a way that the maximum accuracy may be obtained. In his teaching-work, Astrophilus encourages his students in every way possible to appreciate the value of mathematical training; he knows from his own experience that Humanity owes a great debt to Mathematics for what it provides in disciplining, harmonizing, and focalizing the mental vehicles and the powers of consciousness. To engage successfully in mathematical endeavors, one cannot be satisfied with anything less than right (truthful) results!

It is interesting--and significant--to note that so many forms of visual exploration are made through a circular frame-work. Our two eyes are focused in such a way that everything we see is through a "circular window;" the astronomer gazes through a circular mechanism to study and explore a portion of the solar system, a galaxy or some other division of the phenomenal universe exterior to the earth; the chemist and biologist peer through a circular microscope to study the "littleness" of material phenomena. In his work as a student of human consciousness, Astrophilus centers his attention also on a circular diagram formed by a certain arrangement of the zodiacal belt which contains a specialized set of symbols placed according to accurate mathematical principles and which convey a revelation of spiritual laws. Astrophilus is a specialist in the sense that his prime objective is to serve the furthering of human enlightenment but the principles which are inherent in his specialized study are germane to all forms of exploration made by other scientists.

As far as scope of knowledge is concerned, Astrophilus "takes hands" with all of his brother-scientists; the essences of his study and exploration are found to be represented in some form or degree in all other branches of study by which the nature of the universe is revealed and comprehended. In the degree that the nature of the universe is comprehended does the realization of unity with the universe unfold. Astrophilus must use the powers of analysis just as a chemist does, but in addition he must also synthesize because his purpose is not to teach the "separateness of man from the universe" but to reveal the unity of humans with each other, with all creatures, and with divine source. The analytical factor in his study pertains to the human as an individualized aspect of consciousness, with particular karmic requirements of experience and particular "personal tendencies." The factor of synthesis is actually a process of the Higher Mind by which Astrophilus may assist the person to experience an expansion of awareness of unity within himself through developing spiritual autonomy and of awareness of unity with other humans through affinity of common destiny and evolutionary goal.

Astrophilus, in addition to being a scientist, mystic, and priest, is also an interpretative artist. He seeks to find, through study of horoscopical indications, those modes and techniques by which the person concerned may through regeneration of consciousness become consciously more and more aware of the beauties of his own spiritual consciousness. Every principle used in astrological representation has its counterpart in one--or all--of the fine arts. In an over-all survey of astrological factors, we find design, rhythm, color (by implication), structure, mass (by implication), spectrum, and every conceivable aspect of beauty that can be realized or externalized by human beings. During the many years and lives of his experience, Astrophilus enjoyed contact with artists and artistic interpreters of all kinds. His spiritual affinity to these persons was based on the inspirational factor inherent in all artistic expression and enlightenment-service. To "enlighten" might be thought of as a process by which "light is thrown into consciousness" or "the presence of light in consciousness is revealed." Any human, by whatever mode or means, who serves to reveal harmony to other persons is an inspirator; harmony is the revelation of equilibrium throughout all parts of a thing and it is the conscious re-attainment of equilibrium that characterizes our evolutionary goal. It was from that state that we were projected, as individualizations, at the start of our experience as humans. All apperception of Beauty is a glimpse of the "heaven in our own consciousness," and through his knowledge of alchemy, Astrophilus is able to help people understand how they may effect conscious regeneration of their inner powers and thereby unfold wider and purer apperceptions of the beauty of their divine nature.

After many lives devoted to the practice of realized truths and in accordance with high ethical standards, Astrophilus found a strange and wonderful awakening in his own consciousness. It pertained to a cognition that "the planets" which he had studied for so long in horoscopes were modes by which the divine revealed itself through human consciousness. As a result, Astrophilus found himself becoming more and more conscious of God's presence in all planetary aspects--each aspect being thus perceived to be an indication not of "absolute evil" or "absolute good" but rather that of spirit-ual viewpoint. The hitherto-considered "evil" aspects were then perceived to be, in truth, symbolic pictures of experience-methods by which a human must ultimately realize his own divine nature. All square and opposition aspects register karmically timed and karmically qualified conditionings from which, through incarnate experience, the human is to be brought face-to-face with the results of past thought and action; from experiencing these results he is to apprehend in greater degree those modes of thought and action which further, rather than obstruct, evolutionary unfoldment and realization of the Spirit's highest ideals.

Reader, these things said herein about "Astrophilus" are really being said about you--now an astrological student, perhaps a practitioner--who from some point on the Path may unfold the powers of the perfectly trained mental vehicle, the winged power of intuition and the diamond-clear power of clair-cognition through your continued and devoted application to astrological study. May the Spirit within grant you the strength of patience, the buoyancy of inspirational joy, and the blessing of ever-expanding appreciation of your fellow-humans through the truth- pursuing study of horoscopes as the need for such study may be brought to your attention. Life provides all opportunity to fulfill the Astrological Path. 