---
title: "Studies in Astrology - Volume V"
language: 'en'
original_title: "Studies in Astrology - Volume V"
original_language: 'en'
author: 'Elman Bacher'
original_source_file: 'self'
---

<h1 id="studies-in-astrology-volume-5">Studies in Astrology - Volume 5</h1>

by Elman Bacher

First Edition 

### <h3 id="table-of-contents">Table of Contents</h3>

- [Chapter 1: The Astrologer as Scientist, Artist, and Priest-Teacher](#chapter-1)
- [Chapter 2: Astro-Philosophy Discusses Government](#chapter-2)
- [Chapter 3: A Study of Polarity](#chapter-3)
- [Chapter 4: Involuntary Military Experience](#chapter-4)
- [Chapter 5: The Giving of Gifts](#chapter-5)
- [Chapter 6: The Golden Rule](#chapter-6)
- [Chapter 7: The American Astrologer](#chapter-7)

### <h3 id="chapter-1">Chapter I: The Astrologer as Scientist, Artist, and Priest-Teacher</h3>

The symbols of the circle, its quadrants, the zodiacal signs, the planets and their aspects must be understood to be symbols of life-essences, their purposes and functions, if astrology is to take its rightful place in the family of Illuminations. The approach that anything that is depicted in astrology is essentially bad makes it, relatively, impossible for the constructive work to be adequately fulfilled; further, such an approach has about as much correspondence to astrological truth as has the "hell-fire-and- damnation" version of Christianity to the simple, luminous teachings of Jesus.

"Philosophy" means "love of Wisdom" and man's paths toward the attainment of understanding are many. Since astrology is one of the principle paths by which humanity finds illumination this material is presented so that students may come into a clearer recognition of the three paths which should be traversed by them, in some degree, and must be traversed if they are to fulfill their purposes as "Astro-Philosophers."

The wheel of the horoscope and its "vibratory ingredients" contain the essential secrets of man's patterns of all kinds--and in all degrees and levels. The progress of the wheel, from ascendant through twelfth house--counter-clockwise--opens up to our understanding the "onwardness and upwardness" of evolutionary unfoldment as it expresses the song of "I AM" in the four quadrants. Cosmic "Triune-ity" is physically manifested by what we usually refer to as the "three dimensions" of length, width, and height but no one of these three can manifest without the other two. This triune-ity of one composite physical dimension has its astrological correspondence in the triune-ity of each quadrant's division of three houses; the four quadrants are then seen to express the totality of the wheel in twelve houses~-four triune-dimensional levels of consciousness and unfoldment. This is the symbolic picturing of "Pilgrim's Progress."

Since, then, the pattern of the twelve-housed wheel depicts the essential progress of any human unfoldment, it naturally follows that its symbols can refer to our experience as astrologers. In other words, certain specialized faculties and qualities of consciousness, in composite, comprise the "astrologer-part" of our being; and for a certain number of incarnations this realm of consciousness is exercised to a certain way as a factor in our unfoldment.

Our "astrologer-consciousness," because of its specializations, may be likened to a "sub-entity" in the entity of our composite consciousness, similar, shall we say, to "yellow" or "purple" being sub-entities in the composite vibrational entity that we call "color." Each sub-entity has, of course, its principal divisions and they, in turn, their myriads of variational expressions. So it is with the wheel and the signs by division in decanates, degrees, minutes, and seconds.

The "astrologer-part" of human consciousness is a composite of those factors which make us scientist, artist, and priest- teacher. Just as the cardinal color-vibrations are linked to each other by their gradations so do these three human correlatives blend into each other to make the "spectrum" of astrological consciousness. All people who work in astrology may tend, to a degree, to align themselves essentially to one of the three classifications, but we must come to a point of "synthesizing ourselves" with all three if our astrological "chapter of development" is to be complete and well-rounded out.

The essential meanings of the first three houses contain the secrets of the remaining three quadrants, the second, third, and fourth quadrants being "extensions" of the first. It is felt that by "X-ray" consideration of the first quadrant we can unlock the secret of these qualities and capacities of human consciousness which in specialized expression, give definition to our "astrological self"--the sum-total of which pictures humanity as "astro-philosopher."

First House: the Ascendant of every horoscope; the first utterance of "I AM"; the physical envelope which instrumentates the consciousness; the awareness of being and of physical manifestation; the awareness of the "being-ness" of all things; the exoteric consciousness which identifies humanity as a factor in the manifested universe; in the beginning, man perceives this manifestation as form exterior to himself; subsequently, in unfoldment from the chrysalis of first-house consciousness, he perceives the multi-dimensionality of life by "esoteric" or "subjective" awareness and realization.

As expression of the first house, the astro- philosopher is "astrologer-as-scientist." His approach to the subject is based on his desire to understand the physical expression of life from a basis that is different from any he has had before. Since his attention is focused on form, he naturally pays careful attention to quality and measurement. He trains himself to scrupulous accuracy regarding the mathematical calculations involved because they are the skeletal form upon which his interpretative abilities will develop. Further, he seeks to unlock the secrets of abstract symbols as they serve to delineate the processes by which the Physical World manifests. He recognizes that humanity functions by its specialized principles as a machine functions according to its mechanical principles. He studies events as they represent the "form-side" of astrological-patterns-in-action. He studies his own chart in terms of synchronizing event with aspect; in early stages of development he identifies his aspects by relating them to vibrational action outside of himself.

Since he is a "first house expression," the astro- scientist is the astrological pioneer. He is a path-breaker in the sense that he "projects" awareness of astrological truths into his circle of acquaintances and associations. He is a "stimulator," bringing knowledge of a "new subject" to his immediate circle or to the world at large.

The developments of the astro-scientist are shown by the first house of the second and third quadrants; i.e. the fourth and seventh houses. It is through these chapters that the astro-scientist begins to develop his subjective awareness, because on these levels he must turn his "astro-scientific eyes" into the charts of those to whom he is drawn in family-pattern and in relationship-pattern. The "scientificness" of his approach urges him, naturally, to try to understand the charts of those who are nearest and dearest to him in personal relationship. The astro-scientist fails at this point if he permits his astrological awareness to be disturbed and distorted by his feelings toward the charts--and their contexts--of those who are close to him. The objective, unemotional, scientific part of him must be trained and disciplined to hold to its own truth, regardless of the feelings he has toward the person whose chart he is studying. Astro- philosophy, in this way, proves its value as an "impersonalizer" of the desire-nature; it makes possible a technique by which the mind may be trained to "see clearly" in spite of the claims of the desire-nature; as astro- philosophers, we must all acquire and maintain this impersonal scientific approach toward all charts.

In his tenth house expression the astro-scientist rounds out his studies by including an understanding of many, if not all, of the patterns of interpretation. He studies horary astrology; he studies the charts of nations and governments, groups, institutions, and events which pertain to many people together. He studies astro-biology and astro-diagnosis; he knows something of how different "systems" present the subject. In other words, this scientificness is extended in scope to include an understanding of the vibratory essentials of any and all kinds of manifestations of the objectified life of humanity. The astro-scientist who keeps his interest in the subject uncommercial has the best chance of unfolding in a rhythmic and natural way.

Second House: abstractly ruled by Venus, the second house is the feminine correlative of the first. It is the first of the fixed houses, its cusp is the starting-point of the trine-symbol and it initiates those levels of consciousness by which the astro-artist is born. Since this is the only feminine sign of the first quadrant, it initiates the two triplicities of the earth and water trines which include the symbolizings of humanity's emotional resources and responsiveness, its urge-to-love and its urge-to-transmute; its urge-to-beauty, with all of that urge's attendant inspirations and aspirations, visions, dreams, and ideals.

The term "astro-artist" is used to designate that part of our consciousness which projects the first house into realms of identity with people, not just of "understanding things." It is from the love-center that all artistry is cultivated, all true service projected, and all refinements realized. The astro-artist sees in astrology a channeling for the releasement of his emotional urges; also, through knowledge accumulated in his "scientific stage," he expresses the desire to harmonize and beautify human life by bringing to people an awareness of the essential goodnesses and beauties inherent in the great Principles of Life as they are designated in symbology.

The essential mainspring of the astro-artist's motivation is sympathy, a basic attribute of the feminine consciousness (second house: Taurus, ruled by Venus, exaltation point of the Moon). The astro-artist wants to help, to encourage, to console, to lift, and to inspire. If he has not grounded himself in the requirements of the "scientific stage" his urge to help and to express his sympathetic feeling, may be, to a degree, impeded because he has failed to train himself in the technicalities of the subject. In other words since he is functioning from the center of feelings-- an intensely personal motivation--he must develop the "form side" of the subject so that his interpretations will be made from accurate pictures. By adherence to sincerity of motivation, the astro-artist avoids the pitfalls that may be in the way of all people whose emotional responsiveness is the keynote of their natures. These pitfalls may be sympathy uncontrolled by knowledge, false pity by which the astro-artist tends to turn away from pictures of needed redirection that are shown in the chart, and failure to perceive how EACH INDIVIDUAL CAN LEARN TO HELP HIMSELF BY UNDERSTANDING HIMSELF. The "complete" astro-artist cultivates detachment from emotional involvement in the problems of his client; he utilizes his awareness of the Principle of Cause-and-Effect as it manifests in the horoscope and sees the Law in operation throughout. However, his heart, mind, and hands are open to all who need his guidance; by adhering to the truth of astro-artistry he unfolds those transcendent areas of consciousness and faculty by which intuition and inspiration are born.

Third House: in this expression, the astro- philosopher combines the qualities of the first two and adds to them knowledge of the human consciousness that makes it possible for him to interpret the astrological patterns in their most deeply subjective phases. He has skill, a trained mentality, a sound technique. To this he adds a compassionate heart--a consciousness warmly responsive to the inner needs of his fellow-beings. To this, in turn, he adds an inclusive mental grasp of the meaning of astrological symbols and patterns as they picture states of being, states of relationship, and states of evolution--not just events and suffering. Since the third house is polarized into the ninth, we see that the astro-philosopher of the third house type is scientist, artist, and teacher. The compositeness of his consciousness permits him to be designated as priest-teacher or "astro- priest." He is the "elder brother" to all who seek his guidance, because he has traversed the experience-patterns of those who come to him; he understands because he has realized through his own experience.

He knows sex and marriage because he has distilled understanding from his incarnations as male and female; he knows husbandhood and wifehood, passion and sacrifice, childhood and parenthood. He knows that the outer is a reflection of the inner and seeks, always, to bring the minds of people into alignment with this truth. Because he stands as an intermediary between man's ignorance and enlightenment; the astro-priest fulfills the same function in his astrological service that any priest does in a ceremonial religion; as priest, he "sees the problem" from the vantage-point of wisdom. The astro-scientist knows the effect of vibratory forces on individuals and groups; the astro-priest understands the vibratory life of humanity. The scientist is objective, the priest is subjective; the artist may be one or the other, depending on which of the two classifications he aligns himself with most strongly. However, the astro-priest's motivation is not scientific; he includes that level but his extensions include the upper, transcendent levels of both mind and heart.

The unfoldments of the astro-philosopher as priest- teacher are very interesting because the last phase of his "cross" (the mutable signs) is the twelfth house--the "finale" of the wheel. Since he is a composite of the first two types, plus something else, his development stages involve testings and rewardings that are comparatively greater than those of the other two.

The astro-priest, in his "primitive stage" is the moralist, sub-expression of the ninth house. His literal interpretations of principle are necessary because he has not, as yet, had sufficient experience to round out his understanding. In this level, the astro-priest sees the chart as "picturing of good-versus-evil." Since he himself stands as a point of differentiation of these two factors in the minds of his clients--and they are attracted to him by the power of vibratory sympathy--his "moral consciousness" is the focal point of his interpretations. He very often, in this level, cannot perceive the "relativity" of what he calls "good and bad" and reads into the chart of his client his own standards. He may have the best of the first two types, but his own truth is, as yet, unevolved. The polarity of the third house is the ninth and it, in turn, is the result of the quadrant initiated by the seventh house and realized by the transmutations of the eighth house. The resultant understanding is what is represented by the ninth and it is that which the astro-philosopher, as priest-teacher, strives for in his unfoldment, as the door into the fourth quadrant.

The third house comes into its "flowerings" in the seventh and eleventh houses; in these chapters, the astro-priest recognizes his "parallelity" with all people; as his unfoldment progresses by transcendence of experience, he realizes love-wisdom. He recognizes that the human is a suspension of the cosmic in all of its expressions and, in himself, he finds that which reflects the solution of his client's problems. Then it is seen that the composite goal of the astro-philosopher is realization that the worst in his client has been his own worst, at some time in the past; his best is an illumination into the dark corners of his client's conditions and reactions to those conditions. His wisdom and his love become fathomless resources for the re-direction of human patterns. 

### <h3 id="chapter-2">Chapter II: Astro Philosophy Discusses Government</h3>

Government is the "functioning of the Universe in accordance with Cosmic Principles." It is the One Directive which impels the cause of, organizes and harmonizes the effect of, every creative and epigenetic action in the Cosmos. Since it is the expression of the One Will, cosmic government is archetypal Autocracy; it is the root-pattern by which every Logos, microcosmically, orders the life of its manifestation and it is that which, in human terms, we designate as mastery. Rulership, in any octave, is an aspect of the Directive Power symbolized by the Sun; all planetary powers are derivatives of this Unity.

The symbolic design we call the "square aspect"--a square resting on its horizontal base--is the arch-symbol of compressed congestion of potentials. It is made up of two expressions of the dynamic vertical and two expressions of the receptive horizontal; it pictures the juxtaposition of diametric opposites seemingly in contention with each other. A congestion has the effect of gravitational down-pulling, inhibition, suppression of expressive possibilities, slowing up of expressive and responsive action. It pictures an intensification of the tendency-to-inertia which, after a certain point, is death of the form as a vehicle of the Spirit. This pictures the "reign of the Devil," the domination of expression by suppression, the bondage of "on-and-up-going-ness" to "in-and-down-going- ness." The Spirit, Solar Power in its biune expression of Love-Wisdom, seeks always, in human consciousness, to overthrow and disintegrate this "rulership by shadow."

The symbol for government as Cosmic or Archetypal Ordering is the diagonal square. This is the symmetrically balanced square standing on its lower angle. Each of its four lines is a symmetrical diagonal, hence each composites verticality and horizontality. Herein is seen the difference, as symbol of consciousness, between this square and the static square. Therefore rhythmic sequence is pictured by travel around its circumference. When the cross of horizontal and vertical diameters is added within this square, each of the two lines bisects a pair of opposite angles and the polarity of each angle-point is thereby objectified. By this four-fold bisection of angles, the Masculine-Feminine of Male-Female of Immature-Mature of microcosms of any archetype is outpictured. We are concerned with humans as individualizations of the archetype "Humanity," so this diagonal square with its structure cross, pictures macrocosmically the government of this archetype and microcosmically the "government-consciousness," passive and active, of the individual human.

We now transpose this symbol into the octave of astrological symbolism; place the circular symbol of the Sun at the center (the jointure of the two cross-lines) and the symbols for Aries, Capricorn, Libra, and Cancer at the left, upper, right, and lower angle-points, respectively. The result is the Great Mandala without its circumscribing circle--the "skeleton" of Humanity as an evolving--not evolved--archetype and that of the individual human as an epigenetically evolving microcosm. We will discuss the "problems" of "Government of humans by humans" as they specialize in the three basic types of "being governed."

Considering the dynamic essence of Aries-Mars as the "personality" of the incarnated human archetype, we are sensitive to the "controlling agencies" represented by the other three structure-points which are all, generically speaking, more feminine than Aries. The feminine polarity of the Cosmos is that which receives and shapes the dynamic essences. As Aries, through Mars, "blasts forth his energies from the Ascendant-point," Capricorn-Saturn, Libra-Venus, and Cancer-Moon stand as organizers and co- ordinators of the vital expressions. "That which Aries comes from"--as the "thing incarnated" in this mandate--is parentage; by parentage is the individualized form begotten, by parentage is the form sustained, protected, and nurtured. Therefore, Cancer-Capricorn as archetypal parentage is the first coordinator-governor of the individual's expression. The first of these, however, is Cancer--the symbol of Matrix, and the arch-symbol of seed-source. This, in group-terms, is government for the perpetuation and preservation of forces; it is the most primitive form of group-government. The primitive human was subjected entirely to the directive power of the elders of the tribe, and his significance was not as an individual, for himself, but as a factor of the tribal unity. His evaluation to the tribe was physical--his strength, prowess, combative and generative ability were the ear-marks of his value to the life of the tribe. His identity was tribal, his virtue was obedience to the directives of the elders. In relationship to that narrow directive he was "child" and child he remained until he, in time, began to realize an awareness of himself as an individual. To accept external directive unquestioningly, unthinkingly, is to be subject to the parental principle of government, secular or religious. And this applies to people living now as well as those who inhabited the jungles thousands of years ago.

Governments that encourage such attitudes in their people as blind, unthinking adherence, in whatever form, to such a concept as "Mother Church"; fanatic patriotism; dependency on group-opinion and group- feeling for guidance; racial prejudice and hatred; or habitual addiction to governmental bounty for material sustainment are those that are functioning as external moldings of a very limited consciousness. They have their karmic and evolutionary place, and AS SUCH THEY ARE GOOD. But no government of this kind was, is, or can be a permanent pattern for any group because its essential function is to coordinate and focus a collective primitivity. Evolution serves to transcend primitivity on any octave. Cancer-Capricorn is archetypal structure; it is the symbol of security to the subconscious of Humanity. It symbolizes "that which was," and primitive (ignorant, fearful) people cling to an established external (parents, home, church, nationality-concept, etc.) to realize security. A government that congests on this function is one which discourages individual effort and thought; and in that way lies the path to dictatorship, which is "parental government" that has been allowed to become the tool for an intensely focused negative power-consciousness (of an individual or a group of allied individuals or nations). In primitive times, people thrived and progressed under the protective administration of men relatively wise, but the same basic type of government, in the hands of unprincipled and heartless persons, turns the parental quality into tyranny-- by which the collective residues of hatreds, greeds and cruelties become focused in the power-lusts of the ruler who personifies such a nation. This type of government becomes DEGENERATE the moment the welfare of the people at large is disregarded or when the attributes of individual initiative and expression are weakened through over-giving. Too much protection and bounty are as out of line with governmental principles as are cruel suppression and disregard of human rights. No one evolves who copies, in his personal life, the degenerate example of bad rulers; he simply adds negative power to the "power-for-evil" of the ruler and to the collective, congested evil of his fellows. To accept national or government bounty as a "timely assistance" and use it for its purpose (to "get going again") is in keeping with the principle of the type of government; to make a habit of accepting assistance from "Father-Mother Government" is to traduce one's incentives for growth, fulfillment, and maturity. (Parents--governors of your family circles--do you encourage dependency in your children? Or do you encourage the exercise of reason and ability so that your children may rhythmically develop the maturity of self-reliance?) It is true that some adults are so conditioned that they feel they have no reason for existing unless someone is leaning on them; they would rather "feel strong by comparison" than try to encourage the individual abilities of the weaker one. They are functioning, subconsciously, to try to compensate for a guilt (unfulfilled responsibility) complex . They resent any attempt of the "weaker person" to develop his own potentials and they are, in this respect, not too unlike some politicians who promise to give everything in return for a vote. Think about this in terms of present-day conditions. To be prominent and highly placed, to be called wonderful, great, kind, generous, etc., is the be-all and end-all of what they call happiness; and they are conditioned--and willing--to give anything in payment for this kind of approbation. A family formed by two such parents, a nation directed by such a ruler, will achieve pretty much the same kind of results--a parasitic undependable child on one hand, and a parasitic undependable, irresponsible citizenry on the other.

The polarization of this governmental type is Capricorn, the Saturn vibration, symbol of the aristocratic type of government. Its keyword is Hierarchy--it is the first type extended into much more diffusion of expression by many classes which, congested and unregenerate, results in the infamy of caste. Cultivated, it provides the manifestation of cultivation and refinement (externally at least), the exercise of abundance through wealth for artistic and educational purposes. The vice of this type of government is seen in the emphasis of superficialities (ancestry, family background, money) as standards by which the individual is valued. The policy or slogan: "As long as it looks all right it's good" is typical of the surface-evaluation of this type. Ambition to realize place in the hierarchy takes the place of aspiration to realize self-improvement; adherence to crystallized formal standards of conduct, thought and belief may designate the identity of a "member in good standing" but it hardly can be taken as an identity of a person who is exercising his individual values and capacities. Saturn, the condensation of matrix, characterizes this type through the tendency to resist--stubbornly--needed changes; maintenance of established forms becomes so fixated a purpose that improvements which would benefit all are either ignored or disdained. The practice, over long periods of time, of wealth being congested in specific points of the hierarchy breeds corruption, because it discourages individual exercise. The monetary "fluid"--the life-blood of practical exchange--is a means by which humans can realize certain benefits by use of their individual faculties and intelligence. When it is handed down through generations in a relatively limited scope it becomes a karmic testing of individuals to take it and use it without making effort for themselves and so weaken themselves, or it makes possible a material compensation, of a karmic nature, to those who are conditioned to use it wisely for the improvement, progress, and well-being of themselves and others. However, a true aristocrat does not need family-background, this-and-that of ancestry, so much inherited wealth, and such-and-such a "position" to demonstrate the refinement of his nature and inclinations. He graces and beautifies whatever "station God has seen fit to place him"; his influence is one of refinement on all who know him. The aristocratic government that uses the public, but which has forgotten that it too has a pattern of service to fulfill to the public, traduces the best of its qualities. To have the advantages of education and not use them for a more extended good, to have access to large sums of money and congest on triviality, to disdain one's fellowman because of difference of position is no aristocracy--it is only a shadow of a mask of it. And the mask smiles-- cynically and unbeautifully. Aristocracy gives humanity the opportunity to observe its collective consciousness of separativeness in action. The study of aristocratic governments throughout various historical periods and in different nations tells us what ultimately happens when, by an illusionary concept, we seek to separate our common destiny-patterns from our fellows. This concept, diffused through the mechanism of organized religions, Christian or otherwise, has resulted in some of the most terrible karmic causation because, by its very nature it seeks to fight against the very thing that all religion seeks to establish--the ever-clarified sense of (God's and Life's) Unity in the human consciousness. The parent, separated in his consciousness from his child as a fellow-human, says: "Do what I say. I am your parent." There is nothing in such a statement to appeal to the reason or heart of the child. It serves to intensify his feeling of inferiority-difference in subservient relationship to his parent instead of increasing fellowship.

The "I AM"-ness of Aries as Ascendant of this mandala pictures Humanity as a potential self-ruler because it is, by attribute, an individualized expressor. For the most part, most of us do not have the power- consciousness to rule ourselves, much less to rule others. But, because we are expressors we influence (a microcosmic octave of rulership) others by everything or anything that we think, feel, say, and do. There is only one Ascendant, archetypally or concretely, and since rulership is the ordering of the cosmos we can improve the quality of our influence on other people. It is true, and this is an interesting point, that we cannot rule or influence anyone who is indifferent to us or who is more perfectly organized than we are--we are influenced by those people much more than we affect them. Therefore we have to rule ourselves better if we are going to attract better "rulership-influence" from others. Apply this to the relationship of a nation's citizenry to its hereditary or elected rulers. Look at the story of France's civilization under the reigns of Louis XIV, XV, and XVI. The corruption and cynicism of the first two perfectly outpictured much that was degenerate in the general life-concepts of the people. The ineffectuality of Louis XVI made it possible for the disintegrative forces of revolt--he couldn't even stand up for the class he represented--to decrystallize that particular form of aristocratic government and pave the way for the more democratic form.

If our life-purpose requires that we exercise power in public offices, then we know that we have the opportunity to stand as symbols of good influence or of bad influence; we will symbolize whatever we conceive to be the principles of government. We can remain congested in our ignorances of these principles and so reflect the ignorance of the people we represent or we can be adjustable to learn and so symbolize an ever-improving quality of power-vibration.

In consideration of the Great Mandala we see that the Cancer-Capricorn diameter--as the "parentage-line"--exemplifies the pattern of "government of people by people": the two types of government represented are communal (Cancer) and aristocratic (Capricorn). Now to consider the significance of Aries as individual ruler-ship-expression:

The "I AM" quality of this sign symbolizes the sense of individualized beingness. Since it is that from which all expression, as personal individualization, is made possible, it is also that by which all octaves of human-rulership are made possible. A ruler--of whatever kind-- cannot at any time be any more than he is as an individual human--his rulership expression is projected through his consciousness of himself as a person. Keep in mind that rulership, in the political sense, is an extension of parentage. The same keywords that apply to different types of rulers apply also, in a more localized sense, to different types of parents. This is so because the matrix-quality of the Cancer-Capricorn diameter designates our citizenship in the family-group and the nation-group into which we incarnate by karmic law and vibratory attraction.

The lowest vibratory octave of Mars is seen to be in his office as releaser of Pluto-Scorpio compressions. This is the ruler as autocratic dictator. His "I AM" is "I Am a personalized symbol of all the congested ignorances, hates, and greeds of my subjects." The Russian czar, Ivan the Terrible, was a perfect example of this type of ruler; his people were a barbaric, ignorant, and brutish lot and their subservience to his infamously despotic rule was the epitome of slavishness. The next octave-- synchronizing with the evolutionary needs of the Russian people--was exemplified in Peter the Great. Every bit as despotic as was "the terrible one," this man functioned on a higher octave of perception and purpose. His will, enormously focused, served to co-ordinate his people, and he worked for years to develop and expand the economic power of his nation and to bring to it at least the vestiges of western European culture. In this type of ruler the characteristics of insensitiveness, forceful brutality, egotism, and lack of compassion arc strongly pronounced. Their egotism does serve, however, a most important purpose--that of welding the nation into a coherent identity and unity. The dormant "I Am" of the national group-vibration is ignited by the personal "I Am" power of the autocratic ruler. The "I Am" of a degenerate aristocratic ruler is exemplified in the character and personality of France's King Louis XV. The vacuity and cynicism of this man, ruler-symbol of one of the most degenerate and corrupt periods in the history of this nation, perfectly out-pictured the crystallized negatives of this type of government-- that of hierarchy--the form that provides points of concentration of power within the national edifice. A regenerate example of this type of government-- and a remarkable example she was--was the great Queen Elizabeth of England. Cultured, enormously learned, devoted to her country's progress and welfare with every fiber of her being, this brilliant and intrepid woman symbolized the cultural and economic aspirations of her vigorous and enterprising people. She was definitely a cut above many such rulers of class-conscious societies in that her intense patriotic love made warfare and destruction abhorrent to her; she has been considered to be the most humanly motivated and enlightened ruler of her age and one of the outstanding rulers in human history. Her unifying of her country as a world power, under a motivation of intense national pride, emphasized the Capricorn quality of superiority that characterizes this nation--an interesting example of national personality- trait. Further degeneracies of hierarchical concept--and this in a most crystallized form--are seen in the age-old, only recently decrystallized concept of caste in India. This concept (derived from human imagining of Cosmic Hierarchy) provided karmic bondage for millions of humans for many ages.

There have been several remarkable examples of Cancer-government. This is the type of government that is focused on the perpetuity of welfare, material or spiritual. Corruption of this pattern is seen in the giving of money, food, entertainment, etc., to the populace by such individuals as the Roman rulers Nero and Caligula. An outer gesture of concern for the public masked, in these cases, a hideous fear and greed. They exemplified, in their policy of giving, the very worst aspects of this governmental pattern. Regenerate, we see in the government of the humane Quaker religion one of the finest examples of this type in modern times. Their policy of universal pacifism is, of course, a spiritual motivation of tremendous power for good in the world. Their contribution to human welfare has been outstanding. The administration of the Salvation Army is another example. The teaching and healing service performed by certain religious orders represents a fine aspect of this concept of government. Even those who function entirely in what is called "contemplative orders" make, if they are sufficiently evolved, a remarkable redemptive contribution through their work on the inner planes; this service is not perceived or observed by the outer world--it is a vibratory nurture based on renunciation of personality- consciousness. In fact, we may consider that the Jupiter vibration, as significator of the abstract ninth house, is mixed with the Moon-Cancer vibration to designate the essence of rulership by organization of religious authority. You might enjoy a study of biographies of rulers--from the illumined Pharaoh, Akhnaton, down through the ages--and come into a clearer understanding of how rulers, as individual humans, personify the collective unconscious, the collective ignorance and congestion, and the collective evolutionary needs of the populace. It is a fascinating study and one to which every occult and philosophical student should give some time and thought.

Now we will undertake to study the principles of government as they are symbolically designated by the exaltation of planets. These represent government by relative mastership--the expression, as rulership, of solar power by highly evolved (kingly) humans which has, as its purpose, the illumination of the consciousness of mankind. This approach to rulership reveals the spiritual attributes inherent in each type as well as the spiritual obligations attendant upon this form of service.

The first of these is the exaltation of the Sun itself in the sign Aries. The identity is "I Am a Begotten Son, or Daughter, of Father-Mother God." This is the identity of spiritual birth and the consciousness of possessing divine attributes. The rulership implied by this vibration is self-mastery which is the source from which all other spiritual government is derived, and from which all expressions of transcendent love and wisdom are emanated. The priest-kings of ancient Egypt, beautifully described by Joan Grant in her lovely book, "The Winged Pharaoh," exemplify this type. These great rulers were spiritually tested for their qualifications to serve as rulers of their people in what was one of the outstanding spiritual epochs in human history. Since specializations are emanated from the One, this exaltation-point of the Sun resources every other type of spiritual government. The ruler of Aries, Mars, is exalted in Capricorn. In this study, Capricorn is seen to symbolize the hierarchical concept of aristocratic government; the specialization of "class" reflects (what should be) the gradations of spiritual evolution. Originally the Brahmanic religion of India was based on this concept; Plato spoke of "the rule by the philosophical elect." The exaltation of Mars in Capricorn, in genetic terms, is the maturity of the male principle in responsibility-fulfillment. Therein is seen the spiritual qualification that designates true rulers in a hierarchical government: the responsibility to keep the spiritual "I Am" alive so that the offices of governing the less-evolved may be carried on with positiveness, courage, and a sense of father-love as the protective love-motivation. To give life is the attribute of parentage; to maintain principles of government that contribute to the general welfare and progress (materially, intellectually, and culturally) is that life which the true aristocratic ruler contributes to his people. His Mars-attribute makes it possible for him to defend himself, and consequently his people, from the crystallizations of prejudice, caste- congestion, and superficial evaluations. It keeps alive in his consciousness-- because Mars is the arch-masculine vibration, as a derivative of the Sun--the sense of valuing and appreciating himself as a worker in the world. The vigor, virility, and positiveness of regenerate Mars is health-giving in its effect; exercise of this attribute neutralizes the dangers of congestion on indolence, luxury, and parasitism which seep into a society that is founded on the principle of inherited money, place, and value. Mars in Capricorn is vitalization of the sense of father-love; its exercise demands self-discipline and work.

The Moon's exaltation in Taurus, second earth-sign, raises the instinct to feed and protect the immature into the consciousness of stewardship. The weak are to become strong. The immature are to become mature. The negative of the Cancer-vibration is to over-protect and to over-nurture those who are, at a given point, dependent. The stewardship of the development of the weak and immature is the exalted octave of the Moon's power. To protect the development is a contribution to evolutionary progress; to foster the weakness is to contribute to retardation. England's great Elizabeth had Moon in Taurus, fourth house, and certainly no ruler at any time has ever been more respectfully alert and sensitive to the vigorous evolutionary potential of the ruled nation. A most significant psychological factor is seen in this position: Taurus is the Moon's eleventh house-sign; as such it relates to Moon's Cancer as Aquarius-Uranus relates to Aries. This position of the Moon (an eleventh house-sign relationship to its dignity) imposes on the spiritually mature the necessity to decrystallize the sense of possessing the immature or weak ones. To seek maternally (Moonishly) to possess another is to identify Taurus as the polarization of Scorpio; the two together form the diameter of desire-power. Any individual or any ruler who has the responsibility to nurture through the Moon's position in Taurus is warned to abstain from regarding the weaker, more immature person as a personal possession. The nation and the wealth of the nation are not possessions of the ruling agency. A ruler receives recompense for his work as any other worker does; that recompense should be an expression of exchange from the nation's people in return for his service as a coordinative guardian. The "overshadowing influence" of Uranus to be found in this pattern is the decrystallization of congestion-by-desire-and- possessiveness into stewardship of growth and development by respect for the individual's potentials for growth and fulfillment. Apply this instruction personally or nationally--the pattern is archetypal. The evolutionary aspiration of the Solar Logos Itself masses possible epigenetic action on the part of microcosms--thus the respect of Father-Mother God for Its children is pictured. Solar power released through the Moon principle says: "Let the begotten microcosm grow, develop, express, and fulfill its potentials; help it, guide it, instruct it, feed it, nurture it, protect it but let my power flow through it in ever-increasing strength; do not over-protect it from access to my Creative Stimulus. Encourage always the ever-extending radiation of love by the microcosm; set no barriers to this expression by congestive possessiveness.

Saturn's exaltation in Venus' Libra is the spiritual alchemical fusion of justice with mercy. It is the dissolving of over- strictness and crystallization-of-concept by the exercise of humane impulses. It is also (because Libra in this mandala symbolizes the democratic government concept) the balancing of self-expression in government by the consciousness of responsibility of citizens to each other through their fraternal identity as co-nationalities. The exaltation of Saturn in this sign is the astrological symbol of the concept of justice for all--a law applies to poor and rich, learned and ignorant, and it means that true laws are those which counterpart divine laws in the sense that no one is an exception to them. Laws which protect one at the expense of another represent the degeneracies characteristic of corrupted Saturn-aristocracy --the illusion of caste- superiority and injustices by adherence to evaluations by wealth-possession. In this sense, the administration of a certain world-wide religious government is seen to be, at its best, a devotee of this law of justice for all. Its doors are open to all, its corrective measures apply to all, regardless of worldly placement or possession. At its worst, the Saturn in Libra symbol balances wrongs by material payment. In societies where financial possession is considered to be the standard of evaluation, a spiritual transgression against an individual or a group or the nation itself is considered redeemed if a certain financial transaction is made. This congestion-in-ignorance has played an infamous part in human history--it is one of the most blasphemous actions of which man is capable. It is a congestion in such darkness that life-long karma of the ruler may be required to decrystallize and adjust the unbalance. In human consciousness--that is, in the consciousness of individuals who are rulers--this position of Saturn in the mandala displays the White Light of Saturn when the ruler recognizes his fraternity--as a fellow-citizen--with his subjects. This is the balanced justice and equilibrium of the ruler-citizen relationship. Let no ruler forget this principle; upon it depends the resource of spiritual value of governmental service.

Libra, as a significator of the democratic governmental principle, is the fusion of the principles of marriage with the principles of contributive self-government. In a democracy males and females are privileged to express and this governmental concept is one which, probably more than any other group-pattern, has most served to decrystallize the illusion of superiority and inferiority of the sexes, relative to each other. Marriage is a two-pointed citizenship of mutual exchange, mutual development, and mutual fulfillment. Democracy is a multi-pointed citizenship of mutual exchange, mutual development, and mutual fulfillment. One married couple is microcosm of all males and females in a particular nation; the polarity of the nation is the extension of the polarity of the couple. To incarnate in a democratic government is to realize a result from many incarnations of regenerative effort as an individual; as with the trine-aspect, such realization imposes the responsibility (Saturn) to contribute for mutual good and justice of all.

The exaltation of Venus in Pisces (as ruler of Libra) is the consciousness of spiritual powers as the governing agencies of the affairs of mankind. To perceive the truths that are behind the placement of rulers, the experiences of nations, and the spiritual alchemy which is continually at work to realize the ideal of Humanity makes possible the realization of inter-fraternity between mankind and other earth-life.

The essential nature of Citizenship is "Fraternity localized." As inhabitants of this solar system, our first citizenship- identity is that of (what we will call) "solarians." This identity is derived from the fact that all life-expressions on this planet and all life- expressions on the other planets of this system are microcosms of a common source--our Solar-Logos. If there were some way of identifying our system in its relationship with the other solar systems of our galaxy, we could further qualify our identity as "galactic citizens," then "arch-galactic citizens," then the final identity which we have with all other life-expressions as "Universarians" or "Cosmosians." However, our immediate localization in the Cosmos is by identity with our immediate Creative Source, the Manifestor and Governor of this system. We could designate this Source by a personalized name, for example, "Helios." This could specify the identity of our Source in the interfraternity of other Solar-Logoi of our galaxy. Then our citizenship- identity could be, as members of this system, "Heliosolarians" to differentiate our citizenship-status from other "Solarians" of our galaxy. As an American citizen of Spanish ancestry is a "Spanish American" (the background--derivative--qualifies the localized identity), so we would be designated as "Heliosolarian Earthians" to specify our immediate citizenship on planet Earth of the solar system of "Helios." In our horoscopes the circular traditional symbol for the Sun placed in the center of the wheel is the astrological symbol of "Helios" as our Creative Source; the suggested symbol of "semi-circle on horizontal line" (a symbol-picture of the rising Sun) is our personalized consciousness of the existence and nature of "Helios"; we designate this new symbol simply as "Sun" because it represents a relative comprehension of the nature of "Helios."

The archetypal astrological symbol of democratic citizenship (as the principle of fraternity manifesting in a governmental form) is the sign Libra, seventh house-sign of the Great Mandala and cardinal initiator of the air-trine from which all specifications of fraternity are derived. Because the four cardinal signs indicate the basic specifications of our polaric-generic Being, the mandala with Libra as Ascendant will now be considered as the root of our democratic citizenship consciousness.

As "Cosmosians," the Libra mandala pictures our attribute as "Reactors and Reflectors"--we react to the stimulus of other people's expressions. The occult mystery of the positive aspect of the vibratory power of Venus, as ruler of a cardinal sign, is seen in the fact that the action that we express subsequent to a reaction to another person's negative expression can be an expression of transmutative alchemy; we may react with pain but we do not have to re-project according to the pain- reaction; we can re-project in such a way that the friction, disharmony, or negative condition in general is neutralized. Thus, in this mandala, Libra (one of the signs which are focalized by Venus) is the expressor, but its expression, because Libra is the reflective polarity of Aries, is that of counter-active or transmutative alchemy. In this mandala, the "transcendencies" of the signs Libra through Pisces focalize the elements of soul-consciousness in those archetypal experience-chapters which usually pertain to the consciousness of the "separative self." To react and express by transmutative alchemy is to raise the consciousness of separative self into a degree of the octave of the "inclusive self." To the degree that regenerate action follows reaction will the combined vibratory forces of two, or many, people magnetized in relationship be transmuted.

In physical terms, this mandala portrays woman as expressor, man as reactor; it portrays, in a more abstract sense, the expressiveness of soul-consciousness, the reactiveness of self-consciousness. Dynamic expressions of negative selfishness are the things which bombard the receptivity of the Venus-vibration; the reactive expression of Venus is to neutralize the destructive element and thereby establish a greater degree of unified good. In the democratic fraternity of marriage, this Libra-Ascendant pictures not only woman; it pictures the composite soul-conscious-ness of both people; it symbolizes the beauties and perfections which each person sees in the other; it symbolizes the beauties and perfections of each that are ignited in consciousness by the dynamic essence of the other. This is the "raising in love" (not "falling in love") by which two humans, citizens in the world of an intensely focused relationship, are enabled to perceive their soul-elements through mutual ignition of idealities. The transmutative alchemy that takes place in a love-relationship (and all love-relationship is marriage in the realms of consciousness) is Libra as initiator of new life-consciousness and as epigenitor of a new world of experience. Husband and wife--twofold manifestations of lover-beloved--are fraternal citizens in the "democratic country of the union which they establish;" the epigenetic development of each, through physical, mental, emotional, and vibratory inter-fusion, is the purpose of the union; individualized expression of both, mutual respect of individualities, and cooperative action in the love-service of child-begetting and child-stewardship composite the democratic quality of true love-union. Consequently we see that a government based on democratic principles is, of all governments, the one most highly charged with the essence of love- consciousness. Only people who had evolved a high degree of awareness of the unity of love-power were qualified to promulgate democratic governmental principles. They were people who had, to a degree, realized the ideal of interfraternity of humans as Earthians and as citizens of a localized national group. The respect for the individual rights of males and females and the provision of opportunity for individual expression picture the spiritual love- principles of marriage transposed into the extended octave of the "togetherness" of males and females on this planet or in a specific racial type or in a particular national form. The individual human, in the localization of his or her personal family life, proves the type of his ruler- ship-consciousness; as he is in his consciousness, so is he in his family and so is he in his relationship with fellow-nationals.

Now to consider the "childhood of attainment." We refer to the sign Gemini in the Great Mandala as the immaturity of the citizenship-consciousness of Humanity. This is the third house-sign; as a root-sign it is the twelfth house-sign of the matrix-sign Cancer--it is that which "lies behind all parental expression." In this respect, Gemini's relationship to Cancer (and its polarity, Capricorn) is that which impels >parentage; it is the physical sons and daughters to a specific couple of husband and wife; it is the karmic sons and daughters born to a specific polarization of national ancestral background. Cancer-Capricorn, in relationship to Aries-Libra, is "that from which Form (manifestation) is derived." We do not inherit national traits; we are magnetized to parents of specific ancestry by the quality of our consciousness. "National trait" is just another way of saying "vibratory quality concentrated in a large number of people." We have words like "Scandinavian," "Spanish," "Polish," etc., to designate the citizenship of our physical birth or the national background of our parents, but there are many people who are not similar in nationalistic quality to their parentage; in fact they can be unsympathetic to the traditions and nationalistic viewpoints of their parentage. These people prove that, in consciousness, they are citizens of a different ideality--they find their affinity with people whose interests, ideals, and aspirations parallel their own. However, born in the localization known as "The United States of America," all children, by karmic magnetization are brought in contact with the ideals and aspirations expressed by the spiritually-minded founders of this nation; the essence of democratic citizenship is the cornerstone of the national edifice which they established. As Gemini, then, our children are "young, immature, growing Americans."

It may safely be said at this point that incarnation as "American citizen" means that every child (regardless of his karmic or ancestral background) is timed to learn more of the spiritual ideal of democratic living. There have been many great democratically-minded individuals in human history. Democracy does not mean "political party"; it is a state of spiritual consciousness. The immortal Akhnaton, Pharaoh of Egypt almost six thousand years ago, has been called the first democratic ruler in human history; as sovereign of his people he sought to establish the principles of religious freedom, legal equality of the sexes and spiritual education as integral parts of the life of his subjects. He was, by the transcendent quality of his mind, heart, and spirit, a true "Son of Helios": his concepts of rulership included a sense of his basic fraternity with his subjects and that of his subjects to each other. If modern education in this country can teach, or vitalize, an awareness of fraternity in the minds of today's children, it will have fulfilled its esoteric purpose. If modern education can teach the Law of Cause and Effect it will have fulfilled its principal exoteric purpose because understanding of this law is the root of all education. The education of the factual intellect is important, of course, but brilliantly-endowed intellects can, and some do, live in a world which they interpret as chaotic, incoherent, confused, and unintelligible because they themselves are chaotic, incoherent, confused, and unintelligible in their relationship to themselves and to other people. They do not know that they themselves cause the conditions which register as effects in their lives. Gemini natives, then, as specific children born of specific parents in a specific locality, are citizens in the world of learning, the world of home and school. In a democratic governmental administration, the recognition is given to the right of every child to learn, to organize and coordinate his mental faculties, to extend his knowledge (brought over from past incarnations) of the objective world, to unfold his talents and potentialities for work-service and to become more spiritually informed. This recognition is given by virtue of respect for the child's individualized existence on this planet and respect for the good which he, potentially, may do as an adult. The generic essence of Gemini, in such designation, is feminine; the boy-student and girl-student function through the years of their learning-experience as in-takers; they function as receptors of and reactors to educational stimuli which are projected by the dynamic essence of Gemini's planetary polarity, Jupiter (ruler of Sagittarius). The Jupiterian polarization of Mercury's Gemini states that all true education is spiritual--knowledge of principles is macrocosm to knowledge of effects; knowledge of cause-and-effect clears the channelings for all other knowledge. The evolutionary instinct to spiritualize the concept of life-service is shown by the Virgo-Pisces vertical diameter of the Gemini mandala; the ideal of perfect personal and impersonal service is that which "gestates" the aspiration to learn. Knowledge (or understanding) that is not used for contributive improvement of human life is, relatively, "dead material." Therefore, as members of family-groups and of school groups, children are citizens in the state of mental maturing. The stewardship principle of this identity is the Cancer-Capricorn diameter on the second and eighth cusps--the "possession of group or national or family citizenship" is to be transposed into the octave of stewardship of the human group by exercise of that which is intellectually and spiritually learned. As long as we incarnate in the human archetype, we have citizenship only as "Earthians"; to congest on possession of American citizenship is to inhibit and constrict the sense of identity as Earth-citizenship. The human archetype is our family, it is the "society" to which we belong, it is the specification of our identity in relationship to our solar logos, "Helios," of whose power we are the highest epigenetic manifestation on this planet. Gemini is ninth house-sign of the Libra mandala--the sense of fraternity distilled from past incarnations represents the wisdom aspect of our focused complementary relationship- consciousness in the present incarnation. Injustices of viewpoint regarding the principles of polarity in human relationship serve to congest the flowering of love-relationship, marital experience, and fraternal citizenship with compatriots and fellow-students-in-life generally.

Aquarius, fixed air-sign, is eleventh house-sign of the Great Mandala and fifth house-sign of the Libra mandala. As the latter, it is the transcendent essence of love-power in human relationships. It is "personal love that knows no barriers of external qualification," it is love that perceives the inner value and the inner reality of human individuality. It is the decrystallization of congested, egoistic aspects of personal Leo- love; it is love as the "heart-aspect" of the Master-ship-consciousness.

The Aquarius mandala shows Capricorn at the twelfth cusp; that which is to be redeemed is crystallization of concept of separative human group-identity. Nations separate and different from each other, competitive against each other in fear and insecurity, are to he, by the Uranus vibration as ruler of Aquarius, re-identified as structure points in the edifice of the total of human society. This mandala, and the placement of Capricorn-Cancer, definitely pictures the influence of the Masters as those who serve by recharging the crystallized concepts of "separate nation- families" by the scope and power of their love-perceptions into a clearer realization of the one nation and the one family. The national placement of a Master--or of one who loves with a degree of Master-love--is the vibratory form into which he incarnates to fulfill his spiritual service; Joan of Arc for France, Queen Elizabeth for England, Kahlil Gibran for the people of Syria, etc. In all of these cases a service of inspired regeneration was performed for specified human groups but the entire race ultimately benefited by that service. If for example, Gibran thought of himself, in a congested way, only as a Syrian, the power of his poetry and painting would have been correspondingly depleted. He was a Syrian only by localized national identity; he was, and he knew it, in reality an Earthian and a "Solarian." The fraternal citizenship symbolized by Aquarius is the most complete picture of democratic principle in action because the scope of its power and influence includes all humans, regardless of outer aspects, background,or parentage. Aquarius, as ninth house-sign from Gemini, is fraternity universalized; as fifth house-sign from Libra it is love-radiation impersonalized and love-exchange spiritualized. All who learn are fellow-citizens and all who love are members of the heart's democracy. 

### <h3 id="chapter-3">Chapter III: A Study of Polarity</h3>

The horoscope is, among many other things, a mandala of sexuality. The life of all manifestations is the interchange made by the Cosmic Forces as they express the dynamic and receptive polarities. That which is dynamic we refer to as "positive," "active," "masculine;" it designates "that which impregnates or stimulates." In physical manifestation of living, generating organisms we call it "male sex." That which is receptive is that which is acted upon; it is "passive," "resultant," "that which receives the impregnation or stimulation and nurtures the new life into active expression." In physical terms we call this polarity-expression "female sex." People are familiar with the terms "male sex" and "female sex" because the generative impulses are a natal factor in their own experience and they are evidenced in the life-experience of other forms, such as animal and plant life, perceived on every hand.

However, the word "sex" is much more extended in its meanings. It is life in action and movement; the eternal interchange of vibratory powers and their effect on each other is that which makes manifestation what it is. And this applies to all planes, from the most dense, slowly vibrating level of material manifestation to the very essence of the Creative Source itself. Every moment of our existence is an expression of cosmic sexuality; this will be seen if we consider a few things that demonstrate our ability to stimulate and to be stimulated.

We ask a question; we are receptive to the information given to us by the person who projects the answer. We speak; we take in breath as pabulum for our words and we project the thought which we incarnate in sound-symbols called words. Our sense-perceptions are agencies of receptivity, by their exercise we receive impressions by which we identify the world exterior to ourselves. We make ourselves perceptible to others by our action in movement and sound. Someone projects himself into our awareness; we react to his expression according to our vibratory state of consciousness.

These simple, everyday illustrations are just a few of the many that could be considered; however, they are sufficient to show that we, as expressions of life, are composite expressions of Cosmic Polarity. We are so constituted that we demonstrate throughout our lives, in one way or another, our essential bi-polarity. To understand "sex" to mean only the attributes of physical generation is to keep our understanding at mud-level. The philosopher comprehends that a principle--whether of sex or anything else- -is omnipotent.

In creative activity the essential bi-polarity of the human organism is wonderfully illustrated. The artist, in his inspirational at-one-ments, opens his consciousness to realizations of the perfect patterns resident in the inner planes; he draws down, as it were, the stimulating power which makes it possible for him to conceive the ideal pattern in terms of his particular artistic medium. By concentrated meditation he molds this realization into form on the mental planes. Then, by the agency of his highly developed physical technique, he gives birth to this particular version of the ideal pattern. In short, he projects this manifested concept into the Physical World and it, in turn, is perceived by other people who derive from it a stimulus of their own idealism and inspiration. Thus the creative artist exercises both the receptive and the dynamic polarities; he fuses his own "maleness and femaleness" into one intensely focused creative act. Incidentally, this is astrologically illustrated by the planet Uranus, which is exalted in Scorpio; Uranus is the fusion of Mars-Venus--the synchronization of the essential symbols of the planets whose points of rulership initiate the two horizontal hemispheres--self-awareness and soul-awareness.

Pupils--as children--are in the process of integrating their faculties through the functions involved in "growing up." They receive a stimulus from the teacher and they absorb the effect of this stimulus; sooner or later they give life to their knowledge by putting it into action in their work as adults. The teacher, who, in relationship to his pupils, acts as a "stimulator" has, in his turn, been stimulated by those who radiated teaching to him. We are all dynamic and receptive links in the eternal chain of becoming.

"Masculine and male" and "feminine and female" are personalized expressions of Cosmic Polarity. The ultimate abstraction of these terms--their composite essential truth--is summed up in the simple phrase: CAUSE and EFFECT.

As the essential sexual maleness of the human organism acts on the essential physical femaleness, so the creative source acts on and through material manifestation for the ongoing of its total Life. The material dimension--in all of its immensity of spatial expression--is female to the cosmic male. Matter has been defined as the "negative Pole of Spirit," "Mother Earth," and many other such feminized expressions, or figures of speech. Neither pole exists--or can exist--without the other; the essentials of each are inherent in every expression of life. The horoscope bears this out in a simple, beautiful way:

Use three blank circles as illustration: in the first, place a dot in the center. This is analogous to the creative source manifesting a universe, a galaxy, a solar-system, or an individual human being. The "Life" of the wheel is not shown; its area is, except for the dot, entirely blank. Meditate on this wheel as it represents a specific life- expression.

In the second circle place a central dot and then add the vertical diameter; the circle now has "Life"--its area is differentiated in the simplest possible way: division, by one line, into two hemispheres. This vertical line is the abstract symbol of the dynamic polarity of the cosmos; it is the essential symbol for the generative action of sex; it is the root-symbol of cause. Apply it to any human horoscope and recognize that this vertical is the composite of the cusps of the fourth and tenth houses--the "houses of parentage." Our parentage is the "first step," the "initiating agency," the cause of our manifestation on the physical plane as human beings. But, note this clearly: we have, as our parentage, a composite of male and female sex; one is focalized in male polarity as its physical expression and the other is focalized physically in female polarity. The two together generated our physical vehicle.

Now, to the third circle add the central dot and the horizontal diameter. This is the picturing of that which is acted upon by the generating agency--the subjective aspect of life, that which was generated and is the result of generation. The vertical is cause, the horizontal is effect. The third circle, with the horizontal diameter, is also differentiated into two halves but, since they are "focalized horizontally," they appear as the "counterparts of the vertical halves. This horizontal diameter is, astrologically, the composite of the cusps of the Ascendant (first house) and the Descendant (seventh house). The person represented by the chart--the native--stands at the Ascendant, his consciousness enveloped in his physical garment; he "looks across the wheel" and, at the furthermost point, opposite to his own place, he sees (in the same way we see our reflections in a mirror) his counterpart, his "other Self," his needed fulfillments, his--in short-- mate.

The thrilling, stupefying marvelousness of astrological symbology is nowhere more evident than as the composite of four halves in one circle. Add to the second and third wheels the complementary diameter; the result pictures the four quadrants of the individual horoscope but, in simple form, it pictures the bi-polarity of that which generates and that which is generated.

You are a man; your seventh house is a woman; one of your parents is a man and the other is a woman. Yet the vertical line of parentage represents the bi-polarity of the dynamic essence of life; the horizontal represents the bi-polarity of the receptive essence. Continuing this approach in a more extended way we see that every factor of the astrological wheel is a composite of dynamic and receptive polarities. Any male or any female can have any of the signs on any cusp; the ruler of the chart, the Sun and the Moon, or any of the planetary positions can be found in any of the zodiacal signs regardless of whether the signs involved are considered "masculine" or "feminine."

So we are able to recognize that if our physical bodies are specializations of polarity into male or female generative sex, our consciousness is a vibratory composite of both polarities. Understanding human relationship is really understanding the vibratory sexuality of the human consciousness. The astro-philosopher must cultivate this understanding if he is to unlock the deepest secrets of astrological patterns.

The-astro-philosopher who is a parent--father or mother--starts to understand his children's charts when he starts to understand his own chart. To the degree that he "turns away" from anything in his own vibratory picture, will he be deficient in interpreting those of his offspring. His eighth house is his generative life particularly in relationship to his mate, but his fifth house is the area of love- consciousness by which he extends an "invitation to life" to other Egos who come in as his children. All parents, to a degree, express the fifth house love potential, but parents who are astro-philosophers combine the powers of the fifth house with those of its spiritualized polarity, the eleventh. They are not just parents, they are friends; they are not just nurturers of the body, they are nurturers of the mind and Spirit; they are not just "the old man" or "my ma"--they are elder brother and elder sister who have offered to share their understanding of life with those who come in through them. And, as astro-philosophers, they offer to their young ones a viewpoint based on understanding of principles plus the warmth and consolation of a loving heart. He, the parent, will seek to understand the bi-polar vibrational constitution of each child and prayerfully seek guidance to clear awareness of the patterns of the children's charts as they represent potentials for unfoldment. He must understand the principles of life as they are pictured in the fifth-house pattern of his own chart and align his consciousness more and more with the essential meanings of parenthood as a factor in Life-experience.

We have come to a point in our approach to human nature when we no longer put men into packages labeled "masculine qualities only" and women in similar designations of "feminine qualities only." This outmoded approach has been proven to be out of line with the spirit of truthful inquiry. Males can, and sometimes do, manifest a marked tendency toward elements of the feminine personality and the converse is true of many females. The astro-philosopher, who is a parent, knows--and knows with his deep understanding--that his sons and daughters are composites of vibrational polarity and that their purpose in living and his purpose in nurturing and guiding is not to become "all man or all woman" but to cultivate the power to express the best of both, according to the essential requirements shown in the charts. Here is a significant point which is presented as a basis for a parent to determine his vibratory effect on the consciousness of a child: compare your chart with the child's and if you have a planet conjunct the child's Ascendant, then know that you stimulate in a very marked degree the vibration of that planet in the child's chart. This is a basic example of the Principle of Sympathetic Vibration--the "tuning-fork-principle." If you, a man, have your Mars or Sun on your daughter's Ascendant you, as an astro-philosopher, are bound to cultivate the most constructive expressions of that planet in your own living. You are the first "living man-picture" your daughter has and to the degree that you can represent regenerate Sun or regenerate Mars, as the case may be, you assist in a remarkable way to help her "register" a favorable reaction to the opposite sex. Other planets work the same way but Sun and Mars are used in this illustration because they are in composite--the basic or essential "masculine pattern of consciousness." Unregeneracy on your part, in relationship to her, will stimulate her (she, being the child and impressionable, is very sensitive to your vibration) to intensify any unregenerate "male-picture" that may register in her chart and make it correspondingly difficult for her, when she is grown, to "clarify her pictures" of the opposite sex.

The same principle applies to your effect on your sons, your wife's on the children, and the children to each other. This "planet on Ascendant" is a vital vibratory tie-up and must be studied with great care--and the results of the study applied conscientiously in daily living. Further study can be given to any inter-relationship between two planets and charts; note particularly those exchanges in which the dynamic planets of the boys conjunct the planets of the girls; this is a variation of the "planet on Ascendant" pattern. If a girl has a "masculine-plus" vibratory pattern and a boy has a "feminine-plus," and they seem to be strongly drawn to each other in their growing up together, then study the Uranus of each in relationship to each other. Uranus, as has been said before, is the "composite of masculine and feminine." In relationships between people it indicates spiritual attractions of great depth and intensity, and the child who has Uranus affecting the other one's chart in a noticeable way can be potential "illuminator" of the other one. Help your children to understand themselves as expressions of the Goodness and Beauty of Life--which, in truth they are--and make yourself a "mediator"--through your astro-philosophical understanding-- between that which they tend, instinctively, to be, and that which their charts indicate they can become.

If one parent is an astro-philosopher, the other one should try to learn something of the subject so that a degree of mutuality of understanding and approach can be found as a basis of training and guiding those to whom incarnation was given. Each child has, innately, a unique "father-mother" picture: perhaps there is a deep and difficult karmic tie-up between one of the children and one of the parents, or between two of the children. Mutuality of astro-philosophical understanding can be a wonderful "at-tune-ment" for the parents in their cooperative service as parents. These tie-ups must be understood by both parents to be manifestations of the Law of Cause and Effect--to be perceived as energy-patterns that are in the process of regenerate fulfillment through Love. They are not to be side-stepped, avoided or "shrugged off."

Astro-philosophy provides a wonderful channel by which parents who are inclined to live excessively in their centers of feeling-response and emotion may gain perspective in their seeking to understand their children; further it gives the parents a wonderful "joint- hobby"--something they can use to help other parents and to enjoy together as long as they live. Through it they can realize the truth that marriage is fraternity, its life is mutuality, its flowering is true friendship. 

### <h3 id="chapter-4">Chapter IV: Involuntary Military Experience</h3>

Since the beginning of our incarnated experience, strife on any level or involving any quantity of persons has never been anything but a dramatization of the individual's struggle to evolve. The destruction, pain, and sorrow which the entity, humanity, has inflicted on itself has never been anything but an expression-in-action of ignorance of life-principles. This ignorance has always basically been--how could it be otherwise?--an individual matter.

Until certain self-directives have been established mankind functions primarily by response to stimuli to the collective thought, collective instinct or collective subconscious feeling. In this way, Nature provides that karmic return may be experienced collectively. A group of individuals--tribe, nation, or alliance of nations--are enabled to meet a pattern of karmic return all together, rather than in individual timing. All persons, in a given situation, who are at-tuned to a particular vibratory negative--such as the sadistic frenzy of the lynching party--sympathetically respond and express "en masse." Since we, as individuals, fall far short of ideal expression we are, to some degree or other, "tied in" to certain patterns of unfulfillment. This is due to our ignorance of principles and our having expressed in action according to ignorance in past incarnations. Expression--cause--implies its own effect. One of the most phenomenal effects in modern times has been the global scope of warfare such as we have seen since 1914. The opposition between Uranus in Capricorn and Neptune in Cancer, preceding the outbreak of World War I, was the vibratory condition by which human beings in national groups met collective karmic return through warfare experience. This opposition was the "Full Moon pattern" from the conjunction of Uranus and Neptune in Sagittarius-Capricorn during the last years of the eighteenth century and the early years of the nineteenth century. It was the timing for universal decrystallization in order that universal progress could be made. A few moments of reflection are all that are needed to realize that the entire entity, humanity, was affected in drastic ways by this conjunction and its resultant opposition. New octaves of Power and Wisdom were released through the incarnations of many people who, during the past century and a half, functioned as "trail-blazers" toward the transcendence of the no- longer-needed. The powers expressed by these great persons affected our experience on all planes--intellectual, religious-philosophical, scientific, and artistic.

A "life-wave" of incarnations was made in the early years of this century when the opposition of Uranus to Neptune was not only itself "white-hot," but was squared by the opposition of Saturn in Aries and Jupiter in Libra. This life-wave--focalizing the square of Saturn to both Uranus and Neptune--came in at a most precarious timing. That vibratory pattern was, in the opinion of the author, the arch-challenge of crystallization to progress. Perhaps the most important single factor in the life-experience of those people was the choice, in consciousness, of clinging to the old or of moving on in progress through individualized unfoldment. A critical evolutionary point, indeed! The outbreak of the Boxer Rebellion and the establishment of republican government in China during this era pictured that planetary pattern applying to the evolutionary status of a great civilization--an interesting example of the tremendous significance of those years--and of that aspect.

We have a recorded history of many centuries of experience from a study of which we may find--just as we may in our present day experiences--the principles underlying the relationship between individual and collective causes and their effects. In these days people are asking: "After two global wars in much less han a half-century, do we have to have another one?" The answer comes back: "If we do, it will be because we have not applied ourselves sufficiently to learn from previous experiences about the principles which concern mutual good between national groups." In short, the effect--as it always does--will describe and identify its own cause.

Consider the foundation of the Great Astrological Mandala: a circle with a dot in the center; a horizontal line emanates from the center to the left, touching the circumference; the symbol for the sign Aries outside the circle at that point. This much of the Mandala is the essential picture of the potentials of each human being appearing in the infant body at the dawn of incarnation. In this radius are implied all other possible ways of expressing the individual I AM during the ensuing lifetime. Now add the following with light pencil line: the upper vertical--Capricorn; the horizontal to the right--Libra; the lower vertical--Cancer. From the center of the left radius--the Aries line--draw three-quarters of a circle clockwise (backward) through Capricorn and Libra, ending at the middle of the Cancer radius. This is a "motion picture" in reverse--from birth to conception--nine months of human gestation. All four generic points are included in this picture: moving forward from Cancer to Aries--through the three quadrants--we see a resume of the generic qualities distilled from the past to the present. This is the simplest way we have of "gathering" the karmic residues from past incarnations for redemption in the present because the incarnation structure-points--the Cardinal signs--are all represented in sequence, from most feminine to most masculine, and each Cardinal composites the Fixed and Mutable of its particular generic Element.

Since our experience is dual: dynamically masculine, a projection from our generic consciousness; and, reflectively feminine, a perception by our generic consciousness, we have in this simple mandala the essential sum-total of "I AM-ness" of the individual when he came into this particular incarnation. That means his "I AM-ness" of unawareness, fear- hatred, and ignorance as well as his "I AM-ness" of power, love, wisdom--the residues and spiritual accomplishments, respectively, of his past incarnations as male and as female. His magnetic attraction to his parents outpictures very significant factors of his generic relationship consciousness; his at-tunement to his race-nationality outpictures much of his collective >karmic residues. In the latter is found the reason why he has been--or may be--called into military service during this time of universal mutation; it is, in short, a residue of unfulfilled service and unfulfilled understanding of principles.

To the mandala now add the radius representing the cusp of the twelfth house--place the symbol for Pisces at the cusp-point. Connect the Pisces and Aries radii by a straight line with an arrowhead pointing downward and touching the Aries cusp. This is the simplest way we have, in astrology, of picturing the emanation of the past into the present. Since every radius of an astrological wheel is an emanation of the one radius, this shows that the "I AM" of now is an emanation of the "I AM" of the past. The cusp of the second house would, in relationship to that of the first, symbolize the "I AM" of the future, the emanation from the present. Hence the dynamic essence of the Aries radius--the "I AM NOW"--symbolizes the potential, the impulsion and the necessity for putting into action in this incarnation the sum totals of our "I AM's" from the past. This means action as expression of ignorance of principles as well as of understanding of principles; such action, from either level, emanates effects for the future.

Now, to speak of the question on the minds of most people these days, how long are we, individually and collectively, going to continue to set in action causes that will have warfare as their objectified effects? How much longer is it going to take us--individually and collectively--to recognize that certain actions--causes--objectify in warfare, crime, suffering and disintegration? This question--and its answer--has nothing whatever to do with any particular nation, political ideology, or form of government. This question is asked, sooner or later, by every human being. Its answer, and its understanding, are derived by each individual as a result of his evolutionary unfoldment. Change the quality of causes by learning from experience and go into action from the basis of new wisdom.

Since every radius in the horoscopical wheel is one factor of a twofold polarity pattern, let us now extend the Pisces radius in the above mandala to make a complete diameter; extend the line to the opposite point and form the diameter of Pisces-Virgo--cusps of the twelfth and sixth houses. A diameter is the unfolded picture of the potentials of a radius since it shows both polarities. Thus with the Pisces-Virgo diameter we have the feminine signs of the mutable cross. Virgo (Earth) is male; Pisces (Water) is female. With reference to our subject, these two signs symbolically portray the two types of people who engage in military service. (1) Those who enlist-- serve voluntarily--express a service consciousness from the dynamic--or generically male--level; this quality is pictured by Virgo which, in essence, is love-service. (2) Those who are drafted--serve under compulsion-- are moved into military service by external forces; in other words, they are acted upon by karmic forces which are objectified by the representatives of governmental and military authority. This type of experience represents the generically female polarity of the service diameter; it is not only passive but the lack of self-direction implied makes this kind of experience a possible source of great suffering to the individual unless--repeat unless--he makes an adjustment to the situation in his consciousness and agrees to it within himself, moves with the karmic forces and fulfills his responsibilities to the utmost every step of the way. Let us consider a proof of this pattern as it has objectified in recent experiences of many persons:

The draft action of the recent war was a "mutation point" in the life of everyone who was affected by it; just as, on a more universal scale, those who incarnate under the vibrations of certain major planetary aspects "tie in" with evolutionary turning points. Since mankind basically tends to inertia--preferring adherence to that which is established as a symbol of security--most people need to be moved by karmic forces in order to elasticize their approaches to experience and to open up new levels of consciousness of qualities and capacities. The authorities in charge of the last draft organization did much to try to determine the qualifications of individuals for suitable service. The fact that many men were assigned to lines of work that were entirely new to them was the outpicturing of karmic agencies at work on their lives. Their deep inner needs for elasticization of consciousness magnetized them to specific organizations, specific branches of service, and specific localities to fulfill responsibility patterns that may have been, from a time standpoint, ages old. One thing is certain: the draft- service opportunity that came to each man was the direct effect of default- causes which he himself set in motion in the past. To be incarnate implies the assumption, voluntary or otherwise, to serve life by improving the quality of vibrational output and response; we can never improve anything unless we gain a clearer and greater understanding of our realities. One of our basic realities is to attain mastery of individual destiny; this is proven in our possessing the faculty of choice. We can choose to make any experience a "mutation point" of up-turning or down-turning depending on the quality of our reaction to and action upon a given situation. We can learn how to make better choices to the degree that we become unemotionally aware of the quality of effects.

If we have failed--and we all have--to serve according to principle in the past, then we recognize that life, through consciousness, provides the opportunity to redeem the quality of deficient service by at-tunement with group experience so that the combined consciousness of the group may add power to the regenerative effort, and each person who is constructively conditioned then serves all others who are similarly conditioned to the furtherance of progress. Military service is one of the most conspicuous examples, in time of "global stress," by which life makes this opportunity possible, and each person is thereby placed where and with whom his karma (self-generated destiny) decrees.

Your horoscope is a variation of the Great Mandala, but your twelfth and sixth houses are in the same place as those of everyone else. Study the signs on the cusps of your Mutable Houses--third to ninth, sixth to twelfth--as the vibratory cross that, in your chart, corresponds to the Mutable Cross of the Great Mandala. Focus your attention on the planetary rulers--their placements, aspects, and generic quality--of two houses: 12th and 6th. Study with great care all squares and oppositions involving your twelfth house and its ruler. The ruler of your twelfth house gives you the key to your at-tunement with karmic forces; its regenerate aspects will picture your deep superconscious spiritual strengths to meet and transcend the "tough experiences" represented by its unregenerate aspects. In such an experience you will "tangle" with much that represents the negative astral in human consciousness--your negative twelfth house vibratory conditions picture your magnetization to the people thus represented who will serve as challenges to your deep desire for redemptive action and expression. Inform yourself of the principle of this planet and the principle of every planet that aspects it; you will--because you need it--be tested mightily at that point. Know that "Planets are People." Your chart, in every respect, will be out-pictured beautifully or otherwise by the people you will have to associate with in this period of "redemptive service."

In time of planetary conflict the individual can take one of four choices: (1) an uncompromising abstinence from participation in any form; (2) abstinence from combat but willingness to serve in another way; (3) voluntary enlistment as a "self-propelled" gesture of service; (4) letting oneself be drafted and taking what is dished out. Of these four, the last requires the maximum of adjustability to the directives of karmic forces, since it is symbolized by the Pisces-point of the Pisces-Virgo diameter. Conscientious fulfillment of "everything that is dished out" is the keyword to keep in mind to neutralize resistances and resentments--because in that attitude of fulfillment, the service will be done--and that is the purpose behind the whole thing. By an expansive exercise of intelligence and expression of abilities as they are required will the person find himself growing in an amazing way because he will be called upon to consider many problems and situations that he never dealt with before. The Pisces vibration symbolizes the need and necessity of the drafted man to keep himself at-tuned to his own and everyone else's best; he must "alert" his ideality and seek to perceive the best potentials of all and recognize every opportunity to project his best; to encourage and hearten when it is needed; to elasticize his appreciation of the value of each factor in the experience as an opportunity to learn.

Students--it is worse than futile to congest on resentment if this experience comes to you. Your life goes on through it-- though in ways which you may never have consciously planned or expected. No one can make you waste your time if you utilize your time-material. No one can make you waste your talents if you exercise your abilities and let yourself become aware of deeper resources of physical, mental, and spiritual strength.

The whys and wherefores of this experience are pictured in your horoscope. In ways which you may not even imagine, you can, if you must and will, become more aware of who and what you really are for the improvement of your entire incarnation and for your relationships with people in the future. 

### <h3 id="chapter-5">Chapter V: The Giving of Gifts</h3>

We use the word anniversary to designate a timing for the expressions of our appreciation of life. To those we love, admire, and respect we do not give gifts simply because these persons have succeeded in living a certain number of years--because it is natural for everyone to remain on this plane as long as he can. We give gifts at our festival occasions to express our appreciation that those we love (whose vibratory qualities represent our ideals) have remained here with us. We love, admire, and respect certain people because their vibratory quality is such that it stimulates something of our finer, regenerate consciousness; contact with these persons "ignites" our perception of the Light that abides in each of us and of which we are the manifested expressions on this plane.

All ceremonies pertaining to the spacing of human experience originate in the primeval impulse to recognize the principles of life in their rhythmic expression during our years here. Since mankind tends to objectify consciousness, festivals and symbolic ceremonies are used to interpret man's awareness of life-processes. It will be observed that all peoples have their own particular ways of presenting their interpretations of life; some are joyous and rhapsodic in quality, others are dignified and solemn. Ceremonies and festivals are dramatizations of mankind's emotional reactions to the phenomena of life and his giving is an expression of his appreciation and/or sympathies.

At the festival of Easter mankind, according to place and time, celebrates his joy-in-living--the primordial response to awareness of his on-going as a physical manifestation; his gratitude for the Earth as a physical expression of beauty in its flowering, fragrance, and promise of fruition. This is the occasion when mankind celebrates the Ascendant of the horoscope--the renewing of the I AM consciousness, the upward glance, the forward impulse. The reference to the Ascendant of the horoscope pertains to the dynamic, energizing quality of the sign Aries, the Ascendant-sign of the abstract horoscope of the entity, humanity. The Easter-festival, regardless of its varied forms and rituals, is mankind's "song of confidence in Life," the indestructible faith in universal good that makes possible his equally indestructible determination to progress. Easter is the timing in each year- period to re-charge our own--and others'--consciousness with renewed vitality, renewed courage, renewed awareness of the Divine Potential, and renewed joyousness in the releasements and expressions of that potential. The story of the Resurrection is the drama of liberation; our gift-giving at this season is our appreciation of the liberating agency of Spirit as it manifests through those we love, and the liberation which their love and encouragement has meant in our lives. Easter is the "decrystallizing" function of Spirit, and in the horoscope it is symbolized by the vibration and action of the planet Uranus and the function of the sextile aspect between two planets to decrystallize a congestion made by either or both of them to other planets. The transmutation of quality of one--or both--squared or opposed planets permits a redistribution of the planetary energies for more constructive expression. This is the "Resurrection" in the life of each human who progresses spiritually. Our "Easter gift," as Astro-philosophers, is our contribution of insight to unraveling the congestions of our fellows and assisting them to redirect themselves onto higher levels of consciousness and expression.

The birthday celebration of an individual is an appreciation--by his loved ones and friends--of the way he expresses the ruler of his Ascendant. This planet, whatever and wherever in the chart, is the symbol of self-awareness and personality-potential. Our giving of gifts at such a time is our expression of appreciation for the Light which that person represents in our lives--as a "spark of the Divine Light." We must be grateful for the efforts made by those close to us to improve their vibratory qualities and expressions; their improvements assist us to make ours since their best ignites our best. We objectify our appreciation by a material return-- something that will lift further the consciousness of the appreciated person.

It is not known by the writer whether occasions comparable to "Mother's Day" and "Father's Day" have been celebrated by other races or if they are, uniquely, American festivals. However, in composite, they are the "festival of the fourth and tenth houses"--the vertical diameter of the horoscope, the dynamic Essence of the universe. In appreciation of the people it commemorates, we signify our reverential awareness of Love- radiation, Sacrifice, Nurture, and Protectiveness which are the inherent regenerate "bases" of the parental principles. We lovingly give a gift to Mother and Dad on "their day" to express our appreciation to them as individuals who, in Love-service, provided us with incarnation, protected and guided us in our years of growing. But we appreciate something of which Mother and Dad are individual human expressions: the nutritive and protective forces of Life itself. Mothers and Dads who are truly loved and respected by their children are so because they, in themselves, symbolize the overshadowing protection of Divine Forces; their service of sacrificial Love is a human counterpart of all out-giving for the perpetuation and on-going of human life.

When, indeed, has Mankind not celebrated, in ceremony, the union of two who love each other? The festival of marriage is the dramatization of the horizontal diameter of the horoscope, the cusps of the first and seventh houses. The ecstasy and inspiring beauty of love-union is the agency by which mankind is most intensely alerted to the existence of his ideal self--ignited in his consciousness by the virtues and graces of the person who represents his or her complement. The human heart responds with utter joy to the "beauty that is Love" and those persons who have lived this beauty in the marital relationship stand as symbols, in human form, of the eternalness of beauty itself. We respond with a sense of deep rapture to the exalted vibration of a wedding ceremony--and the radiant happiness of the new wife and husband bring forth our most sincere wishes that their experience together will be happy and successful in every way. Because of the quality of spirit that they display, we appreciate couples who make a true success of marriage because they have lived the truth of loving and we are grateful to them for what they represent. The Astro-philosopher "celebrates the horizontal diameter" whenever he learns something from the best of other people and incorporates those qualities into his own living. The other person represents the seventh house--the complement; he is the Ascendant--the I AM; the fusion of the best of the complement into the I AM consciousness is what the marriage ceremony really symbolizes--the rounding out of personal consciousness into a more complete and perfect whole. As wives and husbands, Astro-philosophers re- live the love that united them whenever they seek to emulate the virtues and regenerate qualities of their partners: and they use the symbolic patterning of their horoscopes to clarify the inner meanings of their union and to gain perspectives on how each can help, teach, and guide the other.

Though it is not credited with the scope of meaning implied by Easter or Christmas, the festival of St. Valentine's Day is a charming occasion which celebrates the fifth house of the horoscope and the sign Leo. This is the "song of the young in heart," the "star-shine of love," the warm and gracious impulse of the human heart to appreciate the beauties and virtues of the opposite sex, the recognition of the dawning of emotional fulfillment. Gifts of flowers and sweets are offered as expressions of the "feelings of sweetness" in our hearts to those who represent our ideal of loveliness and charm. The radiant quality implied by the sign Leo is that from which our Love consciousness warms and blesses the lives of those who are dear to us--we express to these persons our appreciation for the ideal which they represent to us. The young woman or young man who is beloved is a human symbol of Life's beauty in the eyes of the one who loves and the message that is presented by the sign Leo is that of: "live by loving;" "keep your heart renewed and refreshed by warm impulses of affection; "keep your perception of beauty alive by loving the finest in the other person." The daily gift of our heart's finest impulses toward beautiful living in relationship, the enchantment of harmonious togetherness and the inspiration of ever-renewed awareness of the Light which is inherent in the consciousness of the loved one is the true celebration of St. Valentine's Day--the annual gift of flowers (or whatnot) is simply the outer expression of that which the human heart should express continually toward the loved one; it is our appreciation of that which the person represents to us as an ideal of our hearts.

The composite festival, in the sign Scorpio, of Halloween--October 31--and All Saints' Day--November 1--has a much more solemn implication; it is the "Occultist's Festival."

Halloween, in later days, has become a festival of "fancy-dress and monkey-shines"--a far cry from the deeply spiritual significance which it had originally. Its perpetuation through history has been an expression of mankind's awareness of life on the inner planes and its astrological pattern, through the sign Scorpio, is the eighth house--the regeneration of evil into Good--the arch-symbol of the Powers of the White Occultist. Halloween is, according to old traditions, the one night of the year when those dead are granted respite from the bondage of their graves and freedom to roam the habitations of the living. The picturing of witches, devils, skeletons, and all such weird creatures are dramatizations, by man's imagination, of his awareness of the earth-bound and condemned; they symbolize his fear of the unknown--unknown because not understood. The sequence of Halloween with All Saints' Day completes the meaning of this festival: the conquest of the forces of darkness (fear and ignorance) by the Forces of Light (Virtue and Truth). In this connection, and at this point, a word of deepest appreciation to:

Mr. Walt Disney, whose work in motion-pictures has proved him to be one of the greatest agencies for inspiring the heart of humanity in the world today. In the last two parts of his monumental work "Fantasia"--"Night On Bald Mountain" and "Ave Maria"--Mr. Disney and his colleagues have presented this "Scorpionic Festival" in magnificently dramatic form. We see the shades of Egos who, while on earth, became congested in negative qualities of pride lust, greed, cruelty, wrath, and envy. In "Fantasia" the characters which serve to represent these qualities live in a world where all is dark, smoky, fetid, painful, and anguished. These levels of consciousness, in any human being, are truly the hell-realms, and in such, we are lost in the power of the Prince of Darkness, hopeless and lacking self- direction. The luminous music of "Ave Maria" introduces the advent of dawn which is the Light of Truth, Purity, and Virtue, dispelling the perverse and dark conditions and powers of the "Black Angel." The occultist, or Astro- philosopher, who meets his personal experiences with courage and fortitude, fulfills them to the best of his ability and through regeneration of his negative impulses purifies his intuitions and illuminates his Inner Knowledge, conditions himself to be a "Light-thrower" into the darkened areas of another's consciousness. We may give parties and enjoy games and fun on Halloween and go to church in tribute of reverence to our saints the nest morning, but we celebrate, as philosophers, this occasion in our daily living when we regenerate and qualify ourselves to be givers of Light to humanity. Every Astro-philosopher has a particular planetary condition as the ruling agency of his eighth house--and this planet gives him the key as to the principal requirements of his regenerative experiences. Each effort in this direction contributes more light into the collective vibratory body of humanity--it is the great spiritual gift by which the part contributes to the well-being of the whole.

The great festival of Christmas is the most "Composite" of all of our present day celebrations. It is the dramatization of mankind's most profound spiritual realizations, hopes, ideals, and aspirations--the focal-point for expressing love for his fellow-man.

It is remarkable that the story of the first Christmas involves in its presentation life on this plane from the "lowly beasties" to the angelic hosts--the complete range of life-expressions from the most humble to the most exalted. Kings and wise men, humble shepherds, the angelic voices, the transfigured human parents--all grouped around the representation of Divine Spirit embodied in the purity of the new-born child. This festival is the dramatization of the eleventh and twelfth houses of the Abstract Horoscope as the impulse behind the manifestation of the cardinal cross; the symbol made by the vertical and horizontal diameters of the wheel is the Mighty Symbol of Incarnation.

The eleventh house is spiritualized universal Love- consciousness--the polarization--or higher octave--of the fifth house. Its abstract rulership by Uranus is Love for all, Love that recognizes no limitations or hindrances, Love that decrystallizes and transforms all limited conditions. The twelfth house is the voice of redemption--the impulse (and necessity) to reincarnate for further fulfillment through evolutionary processes and experiences. That which is manifested by the powers of these two houses is the expression, in material dimension, of the bi-polar vehicle through which the latent Godhood is revealed. "...and He took upon Himself the likeness of a man" is the statement of Spirit manifested, and it pertains to the appearance of every Life-expression on this plane.

In the consciousness of humanity, the symbol of a child has always represented the innocence of a new start; in the adoration of the Child who was to be Christed, we see the dramatization of mankind's up-looking to the vision of its own forgotten purity. Our hearts are deeply touched by the vibratory power of this festival because, all over the world, the joyousness and well-being of children and, in general, all people who are dependent, are focal-points of our emotional attention. We seek to manifest the power of benevolence to make better the conditions of others.

Since incarnations are taking place every day all over the world we realize that spirit, manifesting, is an endless process and the Principle of Light, incarnate, is implied by every birth on this plane. Our giving of gifts at this season is our dramatization of homage to the Divine which is manifesting through myriads of forms through the entire cycle of evolution and our expressions of friendliness and good-will toward our brothers and sisters constitute our recognition of them as expressions of divine light, and divine love.

The reality of Christmas can only be perpetuated if we function in this consciousness daily--never to lose sight of the essential light in all other human beings. The continued expression of such consciousness makes more and more evident the underlying meaning of the statement that: "He came that the Kingdom of Peace and Righteousness would be established on Earth." As with the Teacher, so with us; we are all agencies of this illumining and transfiguring power; our reverence for the Child, His human parents and the Angelic Hosts is our reverence for the love and the light which enfolds us all. 

### <h3 id="chapter-6">Chapter VI: The Golden Rule</h3>

"Do unto others what you would that they do unto you."

This Great Commandment was given as a directive for conduct so that humanity could become aware of the action of the universal Law of Cause and Effect in its experiences, relationships, and affairs. By adherence to it, the self-preservative impulse is appealed to in such a way that consideration of the well-being, happiness, and success of other people is stimulated, and the natural, normal desires for fulfillment of the individual are extended into the higher octave of fulfillment for the self and for the "other self"--which means "all people."

In considering the "self and the other self," let us re-word the Commandment slightly into: "I do unto others; so do they unto me:" and combine this phrase with the following simple mandala: a circle with horizontal diameter; the symbol for the sign Aries at the point which corresponds to the Ascendant; the symbol for the sign Libra at the point corresponding to the seventh cusp.

Place the point of a pencil on the Aries cusp as you say "I do;" as you say "unto," let the pencil-point travel around the circumference of the wheel passing (what would be) the cusps of the second, third, fourth, fifth, and the sixth houses, arriving at the seventh cusp as you say "others;" let it remain there as you say "so do they;" let it travel over the upper semi-circle--the cusps of the eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth houses--as you say "unto" and arrive back at the Ascendant when you say "me." Repeat this action several times to alert your consciousness to a greater realization of the continual, rhythmic functioning of the Law of Cause and Effect in human evolution; in short you are performing a motion- picture of the Golden Rule.

The horizontal diameter of the horoscope-wheel is one of the most important phases of astrological symbology because it is the "arch-symbol" of such as: the occult essence of the opposition aspect; the picturing of the self and the other selves; the picture of action and reaction, force and counter-force; marriage as fusion of male and female qualities and expressions in love-relationship; marriage as the magnetic attraction between the individual and any or all complementary relationship-patterns, whether single or collective; the challenge to the separative self by the vibratory forces which seek to decrystallize the separativeness into the larger Life and Consciousness through union, exchange and blending; the mirroring of the individual through his feeling-reaction to those who complement him, either unregeneratively or regeneratively; it is the astrological picture of the physical Law which is started: every force automatically sets up an equal opposite force; this, in physical terms, is Life's way of establishing equilibriums after stress and tension.

Since planets are the active focuses of principles, and planetary positions and aspects depict our individual consciousness of principles, then it is clearly shown that every planetary focus has its counterpart in the zodiacal degree opposite to its position in the natal horoscope. Give this careful attention--it will help you to understand much more clearly why some people who may not be specifically identified by your seventh-house patterns may appear--in your feeling-reactions--as your counterparts; something in their charts may oppose a point of one of your planetary arrangements. In other words, the other person's planet may serve to mirror the counterpart of something in your own chart. He is then, in part, a reflection of yourself, either to pull you down further into your congestions- -through reactions of temptation, friction and enmity--or, by his regenerate quality, to lift you out of your congestions--to love and ideality.

Since I AM and I DO comprise the "song of the individualized self" as illustrated by the Ascendant of the abstract horoscope, the Golden Rule refers specifically to humanity's "being and doing." It is the start of travel around the wheel through experience-patterns and development-levels. The Rule says, in effect: life is to be lived; I show you how it can be lived in terms of neutralizing inner frictions and establishing harmonies and integrations each step of the way. Let us see how the mandala can be amplified to illustrate the Rule throughout the wheel.

Add the other diameters, thus picturing the twelve houses; add the symbols appropriate to the house-cusps (Aries through Pisces); perform the "ritual" of reciting the Rule--as we did with the Aries-Libra diameter--starting with each cusp in turn. For example, when you "start the motion-picture" with Taurus you are impressing your consciousness with the value of the Rule as an underlying basis of conduct in all of your experiences pertaining to material stewardship and financial exchange and toward all people who are involved in your life through these experiences. So it is with all of the other houses and signs; the Rule directs your conduct in relationship to all people who figure as "vibratory expressions" in your experience-patterns--past, present, and future.

Since every zodiacal point in the first six signs of the abstract horoscope is counterparted by the opposite point, the following is suggested as an exercise for becoming more fluently acquainted with the "opposition pattern;" place the pencil-point on the cusp of the first house and draw it along the horizontal diameter, saying: " Aries is counterparted by Libra;" then turn the wheel so that Libra is on the Ascendant, draw the diameter again saying: "Libra is counterparted by Aries." Follow out this procedure with each pair of counterparted signs until each pair is established in mind as "two parts of the same thing" rather than as "two different things."

Each of the twelve signs is then seen to be a potential starting point for a journey around the wheel. The cusps of the twelve houses--as the horoscope is constructed--form what appears to be six diameters; actually the cyclic action of the "life within the wheel" indicates twelve diameters representing the polarity-action of the horoscope as a picture of the Law of Cause and Effect in action throughout humanity's evolution. These diameters are not complete in themselves until the return is made, since each is simply a short cut between one zodiacal point and its opposite; the two opposites form a structural segment on which the complete circle is built. So, from Aries to Libra and back to Aries--via the diameter--is the short-cut picture of traveling around the wheel from Aries through Libra and back to Aries on the circumference of the horoscope. Cyclic action is implied by both.

Because we put astrological knowledge to work for a certain specific enlightening or regenerative objective, we must learn how to apply to the individual horoscope these picturings of "zodiacal points and their counterparts." In other words, we must always seek to make our philosophical conclusions practical--in astrological interpretation or in living.

We must learn to recognize our patterns of consciousness by identifying our reactions to other people and synchronize these conclusions with the picturings in our horoscopes. When--if ever--this is accomplished we have put our astrological knowledge to constructive, practical use toward lifting reactions of envy, hatred, jealousy, fear, and the like from our minds and hearts. We cannot love our neighbors (humanity) as long as such qualities remain in our "inner." Not loving (the Light in) our neighbor means not fulfilling. Your Light is his light also and the dark congestions of down-pulling reaction must be dissipated if the Light in yourself and in him is to become a living reality in your consciousness. So, let us study our natal charts from this basis of "counterpart" and come into a clearer realization of the fact that our reactions to others form the vibratory barometer of our Consciousness; we will approach this study by renewing our realization that planets are expressions of principles; therefore they are the "goodness of Life in action;" it is our Life-purpose to learn how to live these principles as unfoldment of divine potentials.

Life gives us many opportunities to deal with each planetary pattern and these opportunities are presented to us through our contact with other people whose planetary arrangements synchronize with ours in different ways. We are now concerned with "problems" so we will deal with the "counterparting" of the opposition aspects.

Until such time as you recognize that your Light is one with humanity's Light you tend to "classify" other people in three principal ways: (1) the bad--those who stimulate your unregeneracies; (2) the bad-good--those who stimulate both your unregeneracies and your regeneracies; (3) the good--those you love because they stimulate only your best in consciousness. The "envelope" doesn't matter--relationship, sex, age--we are now considering the "other fellow" only as a vibratory mechanism, expressing in human incarnation, as a factor in your vibratory experience.

Recognize that every opposition aspect between planets in your chart forms an active polarity-pattern; until those elements in consciousness are harmonized by regenerating each factor, a condition of inner tug-of-war prevails. Any person who comes into your life in a significant way whose ruler--planet ruling the Ascendant sign--is conjunct one of your opposed planets is personally identified by that planetary vibration in your consciousness and fits into your life in one of the three above- mentioned classifications. Any person who has any other planet but the chart- ruler conjunct one of your opposed planets might be called a secondary identification or variation of that vibration. Regardless of how the other person is identified, his being in your life is to give you an opportunity to regenerate your expression of the two opposed planets; stimulation of one automatically stimulates the other. If his planet is unregenerate in quality the lesson is clear: you must use the spiritual principle represented by that planet in order successfully to harmonize and fulfill the relationship. If his planet is "bad-good" in quality then you must express the best of both your opposed planets--in other words, you must fuse the best elements of both planets in order to establish greater harmony with all of his planetary conditions represented by that particular planet. If his planet is entirely regenerate, then he is an "agency" for making you aware of the best of the particular planet in your pattern with which he is identified, and he helps you to express the best of the other planet of your opposition. His planet being regenerate, he is your "friend" because his quality stimulates you to express your Light; if otherwise, he is your "tempter."

Therefore, since the opposition-aspect seems to pit one planet against another, the solution is not "working on one planet at the expense of the other;" it is found in translating or transposing the quality of planetary expression into a higher octave, thus redeeming the weakness implied by congestion and friction from darkness into a greater expression of Light. This can be done by different approaches: (1) using the regenerate quality of a third planet which favorably--by trine and sextile--aspects the two opposed planets; (2) using the regenerate quality of the planets which disposit--rule the signs of placement of--the two opposed planets; (3) direct translation-- by applying the Golden Rule--of the quality of the two opposed planets. This is a direct philosophical discipline, since the quality of the two planets is dynamically projected from your "Light-center."

In the illustration above, the alleviating planet which helps the opposition may be congested by square aspect from a fourth planet. If such is the case, pay careful attention to the zodiacal point which is opposite to the alleviating planet. Any person in your life whose ruler is within orb of that point will stand, through his regenerate qualities, as a living symbol of the "higher Self" of the alleviating planet. Study that person with great care. Why do you love that person? How does he "lift" you? Why do you feel that you need him? The answer is clearly shown astrologically and can be perceived in personal relations; the best of that person is the higher self of the planet that makes possible a regeneracy of your two opposed planets That person is personally identified as one of your principal "Light- showers" in this incarnation. Don't waste a moment of your time in envy of that person; seek to emulate his good as much as possible. So doing, you will be learning from your own higher self. Assiduously cultivate every quality in your own nature that inspires that person with feelings of love and respect for you; in that way his Light and your Light blend into an "inner-plane- marriage" and the fused Light of both adds to the Light-expression of humanity.

The person whose primary (chart-ruler) or secondary planet squares your opposed planets is also your teacher, but from a different "level." If his planetary quality is negative his effect on you is to ignite or frictionalize the negative quality of your opposed planets. Such a person gives you a stiff examination of your ability to regenerate your opposition; his negatives tend to "take hands with your opposed planets and pull them in his own down-going direction;" since this person's planets can square your opposition from two points--the signs which square your opposition--is it not feasible that the planets in your own chart which rule the squaring signs may be the vibratory power by which you can free yourself from the "effect" of this person's down-pulling effect on you? In other words, by using regenerate expressions of these two planets in your own chart you release yourself from his patterns and you establish your own regenerate counterparting. He no longer appears as your enemy because you have raised into a higher octave of expression the vibratory quality which you have in common with him and in so doing, you make yourself--if the relationship- pattern is a close one--a "Light" for the regeneracy of his planet. You established "up-lift" for yourself but you also extend the up-lift to your neighbor and the regenerating process is seen to form a "complete circle"--it includes him--it doesn't just stop at your own regenerating. The person whose uncongested ruler or planet squares your opposition has the effect of "brakes" on you; his vibratory quality serves to try to protect you from continuing in your frictional or down-going path. He, consciously or unconsciously, serves to show you the error of your ways. Since you are two people, that planet in your own chart being expressed regeneratively is the way your Light "takes hand with his Light." In other words, his unafflicted planetary vibration alerts you to that which in your own nature regeneratively counterparts your opposition. Let yourself open, in consciousness, to the good in that person; he is your friend, your teacher, your guide, your way-shower; he is not-as you may subconsciously tend to feel--your enemy or your antagonist. Take hands with this person in willingness to learn from him and his power will be seen as an agency of raising your opposition planets into a higher octave of expression.

Another form of "counterpart" is seen when you contact a person who has two planets in trine aspect which you have in square or opposition. This might be called "counterpart of aspect-quality;" he "counterparts" you in representing a regenerate fulfillment of something in your consciousness which needs regenerating. He, then, foreshadows the fulfillment you are to make, sooner or later. Particularly if one of his trined planets is opposition one of your squared ones he will stand as a personification of your own Higher Self; he then by aspect-quality and polarity-pattern counterparts you in a higher level of expression. If he has any trined planets opposition a squared planet in your chart that planet, in its regenerate quality, is counterpart of your aspect. Pay attention to that planet in your own chart and provide, from within your own chart and your own consciousness, the redemption and regeneration of your square aspect.

Let us meditate more and more on the great principle of polarity, not from the standpoint of ourselves being "versus" everyone else, but that we are all reflections of each other. The worst and the best of each is counterparted by the best and worst of others; the established recognition, in consciousness, of our joint participation in the one WHITE LIGHT is the goal of all. 

### <h3 id="chapter-7">Chapter VII: The American Astrologer</h3>

The horoscope of the United States of America: 10th-- 14 Aquarius 11th--13 Pisces 12th--23 Aries Ascendant--7 Gemini 2nd--1 Cancer 3rd--21 Cancer. Planets: Uranus--9 Gemini Mars--21 Gemini Venus--3 Cancer Jupiter--6 Cancer Sun--13 Cancer Mercury--24 Cancer North Node--7 Leo Neptune- -24 Virgo Saturn--15 Libra Pluto--27 Capricorn Moon--18 Aquarius. Mercury in Cancer is ruler of the chart and the numerical power five (the sum of digits representing July 4, 1776) is the Mercury number. The three principal planetary powers are, in sequence of relative value: (1) Moon in Aquarius; (2) Mercury in Cancer; (3) Uranus in Gemini. All other planets are related, by disposition, to Moon (Venus, Jupiter, and Sun in Cancer, Saturn in Libra, Pluto in Capricorn, no planets in Taurus, Sagittarius, or Leo) and Mercury (Mars in Gemini, Neptune in Virgo, no planets in Aries, or Pisces).

The "personal rulership" by Mercury designates this nation as a "messenger of the gods" in the sense that the United States of America has, as its evolutionary purpose, the fusion of races, nationalities, and religions for gestation of the Aquarian Age. We have incarnated here at this time--during the past 174 years--to learn more about the principles of life in terms of our archetypal nature as humans. We are, by virtue of our Gemini Ascendant and third house Mercury, a composite of life students, a national epitome of basic brotherhood-sisterhood relationship of humans. The chart's ruler focalizes the Ascendant-identity in the third house-sign, Cancer; the third cusp is then the vibratory ascendant; its ruler, the Moon in Aquarius, is the vibratory ruler, Cancer is "matrix," "seed," "nest," "mother," "enfoldingness," "protectiveness of the immature, the unformed, and the growing." The Cancer-Capricorn diameter is the vibrational diameter of parentage, and in this chart its rulers, Moon in Aquarius and Saturn (exalted) in Libra, the fixed and cardinal of the air-trine, are trine to each other. That which is being gestated--the New-Age Race--will be matured in spiritual aristocracy of true, living democracy if, repeat if, certain vital realizations are made by each progressing individual. The pattern of Moon-trine-Saturn is amplified by Uranus in Gemini (conjunct Ascendant) trine Saturn, and Mars in Gemini trine to both Saturn and Moon. Here we have a four-planet-and-Ascendant grand trine in the signs of the three octaves of fraternity as the "parallelity in human relationship." Because the chart has a grand trine as its basic planetary pattern, it is shown that this nation is provided with a distilled spiritual pabulum which is to be used for progressive--and needed--regeneracies to fulfill its specialized evolutionary purpose. The "pabulum" is the residue of democratic consciousness of each individual who incarnates as an American citizen or who, by evolutionary qualification, becomes a citizen through naturalization.

Since the "vibratory horizontal" (third cusp, ninth cusp) of the chart is the diameter of education (third--learning, ninth-- teaching) it is shown that we are a composite of life-students and life-teachers. This diameter is focalized by the opposition of Mercury in Cancer and Pluto in Capricorn and the significance of this opposition--as an "awareness-pattern"--is to reveal the timing for regenerating the "practical mind" into an octave of "practical spirituality." This opposition is "channeled" by Neptune in Virgo, since Neptune sextiles Mercury and trines Pluto. Neptune is not only ruler of the eleventh house but it is in the sign and house of its own polarity, Virgo, fifth house. It is felt by the author that this position of Neptune, because the fifth house is in the lower semi- circle of the wheel, is one of the most significant factors in the entire wheel. It is disposited by the ruler of the chart and in sextile aspect (the "mechanism of alchemy") to it. It is the fellowship ideal which must be, sooner or later, realized by each individual American and expressed as a factor of that which is implied in "being an American." The fifth house placement of Neptune is personal radiation of love-power and in probably no other country is the ideal of fellowship more stressed in the pattern of family-life. Democratically minded Americans recognize and respect the individuality of children and the fellowship-relation between members of family-groups is definitely a transcendence of the "old picture" of rigid family-hierarchy in which children are not companions of but subjects of their elders. Because Mercury rules the fifth as well as the Ascendant we recognize that as parents Americans make a dynamic contribution to the spiritual evolution of our national plan in being willing to learn from their parentage- experiences, to study their children and study with their children. The upsurgence of interest in child psychology in this country is evidence of this planetary aspect in action--and it is the democratically-minded parents who comprise the vanguard of this activity. That American parents and children shall be friendly companions to each other--as an expression of Love-Power--is a foretaste of that which is to be established in the New Age.

We have been given information through occult teachings that the progressive Americans of this age trace their evolutionary descent from ancient Egyptian incarnations. A characteristic of this ancient illumined civilization was that the initiate-priests and priest-kings were not "just rulers" of their subjects--they were spiritual parents. Spiritual instruction of the citizenry was available to all--at all times. Only spiritual worth qualified a man or a woman to function as a spiritual guide in those times--all aspirants were tested to the utmost to prove their qualifications as teachers, seers, healers, "watchers," "warriors on the inner planes," etc. All were fraternal in this respect, regardless of plane of development; all were "life-students" who had to qualify by examination to fulfill spiritual service-patterns. So, the fraternity of American parents and teachers to children and students is the channeling by Neptune of the third- house--ninth-house placement of Mercury opposition Pluto. Parents who are focused on this relationship-ideal are those who most clearly qualify to give embodiment to New-Age personalities.

The astrologer, as a contributive factor in the spiritual life of this nation, is basically on the "ray of philosophy" rather than that of "devotional religion." He may be Protestant, Hebrew, Catholic, or a follower of any other form of devotion as far as his immediate "religious mold" is concerned, but his focus of attention is the study of life principles through symbols. The planet Uranus, ruler of the fixed air-sign Aquarius, is the planetary significator of those elements of consciousness that enable a human to "become an astrologer." As a fixed sign, Aquarius is one of the structure-points of the square of resource; as an air sign, it is one of the structure-points of the trine of fraternal consciousness. Its square is initiated by its own polarity Leo (fixed fire), the principle of radiative Love Power; its trine is initiated by the cardinal air-sign Libra, arch- principle of reflective complementation. Dynamically, Aquarius is the love- potential liberated for universal expression; reflectively it is the perception of the love-potential of all people by what we call the "spiritualization of Fraternity." The "Leo part of you" alerts you to your attributes as an expression of divine love; the "Aquarius part of you" alerts you to your capacity to express that potential boundlessly and perceive it endlessly as an attribute of every other human. "Psychology" (which is also designated by Uranus) is the "study of the soul" or the "study of the soul's laws." What is the soul but the distillation of past love-expressions? "Psychiatry" is the study of the effects from congestion of the soul's powers in the desire-octaves--a Gemini-like function of studying a specialization of the Law of Cause and Effect. The psychologist deals with the "Leo-Aquarius part of you;" the psychiatrist deals with the "Taurus-Scorpio part of you."

It is interesting to note that in the chart of the United States there are no planets in Taurus-Scorpio; this diameter is intercepted in the twelfth and sixth houses. The chart contains, however, a very pronounced emphasis on second house patterns: the ruler, Mercury, in its own second house sign; Venus, Jupiter and Sun in the second house; Venus dignified by position; the vibratory horizontal (third cusp and ninth cusp) is duplicated on second cusp and eighth cusp, and the Moon, as vibratory ruler of the chart, is the prime planetary significator; the other two vibratory significators are, in order of significance, Mercury and Uranus. Venus disposits Saturn in Libra which squares Jupiter and Sun in the second house. The violations of the Principle of Stewardship of materials and money is one of the outstanding factors which originate the psychiatric condition of American individuals. The intense compression of attention on evaluation by money-standards with its attendant complexes, tensions, anxieties, and sex-neuroses (sex-consciousness is tied, hand and foot, to possession- consciousness because the diameter of Scorpio-Taurus is a polarity) results in the present high rate of mental-hospital population. Such afflicted persons bring into the present incarnation congested residues, from many past incarnations, of materialistic evaluation of life. But American incarnation is indicative of a timing to evolve from that illusionary evaluation to prepare for the fellowship evaluation of the New Age. It is in the hands of American astrologers to alert clients, audiences, and readers to the meaning of stewardship of materials and balanced exchanges as principles of life. Whenever a person seeks guidance from an astrological reader or analyst regarding "money, income, property and investment" he is, in his higher motivations, actually seeking a clearer understanding of the equilibrium- principle behind these things. Let every astrological practitioner who reads this material refresh his awareness of this truth. We dare not contribute to the weakness of others by catering to their desire for information regarding "good and bad days for financial exercise." We aspire, rather, to contribute to their strength by alerting them to the principles of life which are chemically expressed through media of exchange, coinage, barter, investment, and whatnot. All days are good days for the expression of principle; when the Principle of Equilibrium is comprehended, financial exercise becomes a life-giving channeling for the good of society, the nation, and the race at large.

Because American citizens, as children, enjoy interchange and mutual growth with children of many national backgrounds, we recognize that the Aquarius-power in the United States chart points to each American astrologer as a "structure-point" in the edifice of international understanding. The astrologer who functions with White-Lighted consciousness knows that "nationalistic traits" are temporary collective specializations of human personality. Because so many people are congested on karmic patterns of nationalistic and racial fears, animosities and frictions, it is the privilege of the astrologer who is also an American citizen to alert the consciousness of his brother and sister humans to the fact that no one's identity is "national"--it is "vibrational." An interesting illustration of alchemy is shown in the United States chart in this way: Neptune, ruler of the eleventh house, is squared by Mars in Gemini but sextiled by the chart's ruler, Mercury, which "disposits" both of these planets. When our international sympathies are touched we open homes, pocketbooks, and resources to those in need. When our localized national prejudices are touched we tend to forget that all Americans are fellow-citizens and we give expression to animosities based on external (Mars, ruler of Aries, the twelfth house-sign) differences of "color, superiority, inferiority," etc. Since the ruler of the Ascendant and fifth cusp is the alchemical agency for the Mars-Neptune square, it is up to each individual American citizen to decrystallize the residues of nationalistic and "caste-ish" prejudice and hatred. Each must do for himself in this regard by very virtue of the fact that democracy--in the spiritual sense of the word--recognizes the individual's right to exercise his potentials, make his own mistakes and learn from the results of his mistakes. The Moon in Aquarius, as vibratory ruler of the chart tells us that an ever- deepening realization of our exoteric identity as "Earthians" is the key we must use to disintegrate those negatives of nationalistic pride, destructive rivalry, violation of exchange-principles and stewardship-principles, etc., in order that the Uranian requirements of the Midheaven may be fulfilled. The "melting-pot" quality of American citizenship and civilization is microcosmic earthian identity in gestation. The American astrologer, who in his service is the Uranus-power in action, can do much to help others clarify their awareness of the significance of "nationality" as an evolutionary "molding mechanism."

In other words, because the ruler of the chart also rules the fifth house and the sign Leo is on the fourth cusp (the "psychological base"), the Cancer-position of both Mercury and the Sun identifies the nurture-principle of the love-vibration as the esoteric impulsion behind this gestation of "Earthian identity." Aquarius, with Uranus trine to Saturn (ruler of eighth and ninth houses) is the esoteric objective to be fulfilled. The Sun is squared by Saturn in this chart; blindness to philosophic values impels over-attention on money-values as compensation. Think about this in the light of historical fact. We "take pride" on being the richest country in the world but in all justice we cannot feel anything but shame in the way we have mis-stewarded our vast resources. Conversely, however, adherence to the principles of intelligent and foresighted stewardship would be a demonstration of true power because then the White Light of Sun would combine with the White Light of Saturn as "stewardship-responsibility-power" fulfillment.

Another most important factor in this chart is the sign Libra on the sixth cusp; Venus, its focalizer, is in the second and conjunct Jupiter which, with the Sun, is squared by Saturn. Libra is the arch- symbol of the Principle of Exchange-in-cooperation so we see that cooperation as a factor in our national work-pattern is a "must" if we are to realize the ideal of true abundance. Venus is a result, a distillation of the qualities of energy-expression; when cooperation between work-initiators (employers) and work-instruments (employees) is not founded on a basis of mutual good then the Venus-power is demagnetized with attendant depletion of Saturn-power. Jupiter, as ruler of the seventh house, conjunct the Sun and both squared by Saturn, then becomes the "opponent"--the illusionary satisfactions of material greed. Negative Jupiter is "greed" as an intense focus on illusionary compensations for the loss of realities. It becomes the establishment of false security through illusionary abundance. We do not, individually or collectively, own any material thing--we exercise our intellects and consciousness as stewards.

Also, Neptune in Virgo squared by Mars pictures the consciousness-defaults of both employers and employees in regard to the principles of service. When Neptune, as ruler of the eleventh house, is contaminated by negative Mars then the Aquarian objective of the Midheaven is held back from fulfillment. As long as the slogan "Capital versus Labor" is interpreted as a reality, this square--as a congestion in the national consciousness--will prevail. The sextile by the chart's ruler Mercury to Neptune, plus Libra on the sixth cusp, ordains that every American citizen- worker, whether employer or employee, is evolutionarily committed to exercise the principle of cooperative love-service in balanced exchanges. The employer who is negatively based, in ignorance, on exploitation disqualifies for the creative identity of "employer;" the employee who is based on the "un- principle" of non-improvement disqualifies for further development--he postpones the day for qualifying as a creative or administrative worker.

The astrologer in this country who is focused on the ever-clarifying of his consciousness of life-principles has a specialized evolutionary service to contribute to the race in this "modulatory, gestative" time. In the United States, he can deal with almost every kind of evolutionary social strata, every kind of karmic-return pattern and, because of the repolarization of the archetype during the past century, he is able to contribute a clarifying of relationship-principles through the extended understanding of the principles pertaining to our sexual and generic nature. He himself--through attribute as a "Uranus-identity"--stands as a microcosmic Earthian identity not just because he is an inhabitant of this planet but because the impersonality of his viewpoint, scope of perception, radiativity of Uranus-love-power qualify him, in degree, to personify the New-Age Human. 